Industrial Electrician
Engr. Shahbaz Hussain Version-I Industrial Electrician-IX
GOVERNMENT OF PAKISTAN
Ministry of Federal Education and Professional Training Islamabad
In Collaboration with
National Vocational and Technical Training Commission
INTRODUCTION TO
TOURISM
9
i| P a g e
Textbook of
GRADE
Ministry of Federal Education and Professional Training Islamabad
INTRODUCTION TO TOURISM
9
ii | P a g e
Author: Abdul Moiz Imran, Senior Trainer of Hospitality and Tourism Management,
Karachi
Reviewers:
1. Mr. Nasir Khan, DACUM Facilitatror
2. Mr. Imtiaz Ali Shah, HOD, Fauji Foundation
3. Mr. ShakoorUllahBaig, NUTECH University
4. Mr. Tahir Mehmood, Assistant Professor, Federal College of Education H-9, Islamabad
5. Ms. Mansoorah Ibrahim, Education Officer, NCC, Islamabad
6. Mr. Muhammad Asim, NAVTTC Coordinator
Designing: Gul Awan Printers, Blue Area, Islamabad.
Edition: 1 st Edition, 2022
ISBN:
Publishers: National Vocational & Technical Training Commission H-9, Islamabad.
Website: www.navttc.gov.pk,
All rights are preserved with the National Vocational and Technical Training Commission. No
part of this book can be copied, translated, reproduced or used for guide books, key notes,
helping books etc. without permission of NAVTTC.
Note: Names of Curriculum Developers will be part of curriculum document. In the book there
will be names of reviewers only.
iii| P a g e
PREFACE
This book has been written to meet the requirements of Matric Tech to train and provide
knowledge to the students of Tourism Industry. Matric Tech in Tourism Industry has been
introduced for the first time at SSC level. This textbook is the first national effort to describe
aspects of Tourism development in one book. All the possible resources have been used to make
this book useful and informative. The chapters covered give basic details in a manner readily
understandable to the students of Matric Tech. All chapters include assessments in form of
MCQ’s, short questions and long questions.
The book covers 40% theory and 60% practical contents. We hope that this book will be helpful
in preparing students for the challenges of the trade. Any suggestions for the improvement of
book by teachers and students will be highly appreciated.
Executive Director
National Vocational & Technical Training Commission
(NAVTTC)
iv | P a g e
Table of Contents
Chapter # Title Page #
1 Introduction to Tourism 1
2 Adventure Tourism 17
3 Travel Services for Tourism 24
4 Hospitality and Lodging 30
5 Heritage Cultural Tourism Management 38
6 Tourist Transport Services 46
7 Sustainable Tourism 52
8 Communication Skills 60
9 Digital Communication and Social Media 68
Glossary 73
1 | P a g e
Chapter 1 Introduction to Tourism
Students Learning Outcomes
After studying this chapter you will be able to:
 define tourism industry
 learn about the traits and characteristics of the tourism industry
 know about national and international tourism governing bodies
 know how to locate tourist attractions
 know evolution and development of tourism
o pre-historic period travel
o ancient time travel
o middle ages / dark tourism
o renaissance period tourism
2 | P a g e
o industrial period tourism
o modern tourism
 understand factors involve in evolution of tourism
 Learn about various types of tourism including inbound and outbound tourism
o Inbound tourism
o Outbound tourism
 Understand trends of tourism in Pakistan and around the world
 Know how to read tourist map
 Understanding the different symbols on a map, physical and political map of
Pakistan
 Use symbols on map as a tour guide tool
 Learn why people travel
 Know about motivational factors that influence traveling
 Differentiate between tourist and visitor
3| P a g e
INTRODUCTION
Tourism is defined as an act of traveling for business or leisure purposes away from home or
outside the usual environment. Tourism includes activities and services that deliver a travel
experience. Tourist experience different cultures and traditions including local languages and its
food. Some of the factors that motivate people to travel are:
 Leisure purpose
 Business purpose
 Medical purpose
 Religious purpose
 Sports purpose
1.1 THE IMPORTANCE OF TOURISM
The importance of tourism industry is increasing each year, creating employment opportunities,
improving economic value and the development of transportation. Tourists spend money on
food, clothing, transportation and other services while traveling to different areas which directly
affects the economy of a country. Travel money earned by businesses is reinvested into the local
economy. Therefore, the more tourism income is, the greater the economic benefits are.
Tourist attractions of Pakistan
4 | P a g e
1.2 CHARACTERISTICS OF TOURISM INDUSTRY
A trait or characteristic is a particular feature or a quality of a person, place or thing. One of the
most exciting tourism trait is that it involves multiple options for travelers and tourist. Tourism
industry is one of the most flexible and adaptable industry in the world.
Following are the characteristics of tourism industry.
1.2.1 INTANGIBILITY
Things which cannot be seen, touched, handled or tasted are known as Intangible items. Tourism
products are intangible such as a stay in a hotel, a service during a flight and the experience
throughout the trip – all this cannot be touched.
1.2.2 PERISHABILITY
Perishability is another most important characteristic of the tourism industry. Tourism services
cannot be stored like tangible products. The product and services of travel and tourism industry
are consumed by the tourists for example; if a hotel room is not sold on a particular night/day can
never be sold. You cannot sell the seats of the train once it has left the station.
1.2.3 INCONSISTENCY
Products of the tourism industry keeps changing. Even the same weather
of the same city can be experienced in many different ways, the
attractions and nature of a country will not remain same every time.
They all depend on many factors such as the economy, the demographic
structure, the population, the weather and continuous development of a
country. The price of the item which tourist purchase from a gift shop
and the food they consume from a local restaurant, are all the factors
which affect the consistency of this industry.
DO YOU KNOW?
5| P a g e
1.2.4 PEOPLE-ORIENTED
Tourism industry is entirely build around tourists. People come from different parts of the world
to enjoy and make memories around the place by interacting with people and learning about new
languages, heritage, culture, tradition and food. Tourism industry requires people to interact and
engage with each other. People get to know more about each other through this industry than any
other.
1.2.5 INSEPARABILITY
Tourism services are inseparable from customers as it is the
reason the products and services are being produced and
served. They are connected to each other for example; the
hotel guest cannot experience reception service if the
receptionist is not available.
Information on Pakistan Tourism
Primary Attractions
 Pakistan has unique mountains, valleys and glaciers
 The valley of Gilgit, Hunza and Skardu recall Shangri-La
 The people with typical costumes, folk dances, music and sports like polo
and buzkashi provide the traveler an unforgettable experience
 Sindh is famous for craftsmanship (e.g. Ajraks, rugs and musical
instruments etc.)
 Punjab is known for its hilly areas, rivers and historical sites
 Ziarat is famous for being the second largest
Juniper forest in the world
 Khyber Pakhtunkhwa has a varied landscape and
dense agricultural farms
Activity:
 Find peak, shoulder and
trough in different areas
of Pakistan
6 | P a g e
1.2.6 SEASONALITY OF DEMAND
Tourist destinations are characterized by the changing period of demand, which are known as
peak, shoulder and trough. Peak is the time of the year when tourism is very high in summer
season. Shoulder is the time of the season when there are few tourists around the city. Trough is
the off season time of the year when the demand of tourist is very low.
1.3 NATIONAL & INTERNATIONAL TOURISM
National tourism means people traveling within the country to
see different attraction sites in different seasons. Whereas,
international tourism means people traveling outside the
country to explore different culture, adventure, sports and
religion etc. To regulate and promote tourism there are
national and international bodies. National and international
tourism organizations work for the promotion of tourism.
NTOs around the world are involved in the following
activities:
1. Tourism representation on national and international level
2. Conducting research studies and survey sat different levels on tourism related activities
3. Planning and development of tourism
4. Promoting tourism on national and international level
5. Proper regulations and supervision of tourist enterprises
6. Facilitation of tourist and provision of information
7| P a g e
1.3.1 NATIONAL TOURISM ORGANIZATIONS
Pakistan has very rich cultural, historical and religious
heritage. A great number of tourist from all over the world
visit Pakistan every year. Pakistan Tourism Development
Corporation (PTDC) is national level organization to
promote tourism in Pakistan. The main objective of the
corporation is to develop and promote the tourism industry
in Pakistan in collaboration with different provincial and
regional organizations working on tourism industry.
National Tourism Coordination Board (NTCB) is working closely with Federal and provincial
tourism departments along with private sectors to develop and promote tourism nationally and
internationally. Following are the objectives of NTCB and PTDC altogether:
 Coordinate with provincial, national and international organizations dealing with the
tourism sectors
 Market and promote tourism potential of Pakistan
 Provide assistance to provinces to develop institutions in tourism sectors
 To conduct promotional campaigns and activities
 To create awareness of tourism through private sectors
 Development of tourism information centers, hotels and motels to attract domestic and
international tourists
1.3.2 INTERNATIONAL TOURISMORGANIZATION
United Nations World Tourism Organization (UNWTO) is a
leading international organization related to tourism industry. The
role of UNWTO is to create market knowledge, promote
sustainable tourism policies and encourage tourism education and
training.It leads the change in a positive way across the countries
and helps sustain a great environment on an international level. Some of the key responsibilities
of UNWTO are as follow:
1. Making tourism grow in smart ways through innovations and creativity
2. Making it more competitive at higher level through promoting entrepreneurship
opportunities
3. Creating and providing better employment opportunities
4. Protecting heritage and supporting communities both economically and socially
8 | P a g e
1.4 ATTRACTING TOURISTS
A tourist attraction means a place of interest where tourists
visit, which is typically known for its natural or cultural value.
Pakistan has many sightseeing places and natural beauty.
There are attractive tourist spots all over the country, from
historical places like Banbhor, which is east of Karachi famous
for its museum. Mohenjo-Daro in the Indus river valley,
Harappa near Sahiwal, the Lahore Fort, Badshahi Masjid and
the Shalimar gardens in Lahore are some of the famous
historical places in Pakistan. Murree, Ayubia, Swat, Naran
and Kaghan in the north and Ziarat inBaluchistan are like
open nature. Kalam is famous for its lake in the north.
Lake Saiful Muluk is close to Naran and is the highest lake
on earth. Its depth is still unknown. The beautiful lofty
mountains around the lake are a sight to see. Tourist from
within the country and abroad visit the northern areas the most.
The scenic beauty of Pakistan’s northern areas are safe to say,
one of the most beautiful and important factor in growing the
tourism industry of Pakistan.
1.5 EVOLUTION OF TOURISM
Since the beginning of human civilization in the world, traveling has been an ongoing event. The
early man travelled for hunting and food gathering. Later on the society evolved traveling from
one place to another place which became prominent for trade, religion, migration as well as the
mountainous exploration. Gradually the people travel from one place to another as a tourist
which evolved development of tourism activities from the past to the present concerning the
importance of area in inside or outside the country. In ancient times, travelers used to climb
The Ruins of Mohenjo-Daro
Activities
1. Visit different websites and write a paragraph on national and international tourism
organizations.
2. Locate and visit different tourist attraction destinations in your area.
3. Collect information about Badshahi Masjid and present in the class.
Badshahi Masjid, Lahore
Lake SaifulMuluk
9| P a g e
mountains and cross rivers to get something to eat and also to experience the adventure. During
the Empire era of Egyptians and to the Greek, people began to travel in large numbers for
different reasons including governmental, commercial and religious purposes. The centers of
governmental activities became attractions themselves.
1.5.1 THE EMPIRE ERA
People were influenced to travel during the empire
era, some of the factors were:
 Rich population with time and money to
travel
 Traveling was safe and easy
 The roman language was widely spoken
 The currency was widely used
In the era of Egyptians, traveling to cities were
necessary and traveling for business and leisure
flourished. Various facilities and services were
offered to travelers. Festivals were held every
year which was the reason in increased tourism
because people used to travel to attend the
festivals.
In the era of Greeks, they were the first to shape
the modern day travel. In Greek era, leisure
traveling was very popular. Developments
were made for traveling through currency
exchange and communication skills.
In the era of Romans, a large group of
middle class people were included who had
money and time to travel. Roads were built
along with the great transportation and
communication system. They also built rest
houses.
Egypt
The Ancient Greek
The Empire Era - Tourism History
10 | P a g e
1.5.2 THE MIDDLE AGES AND THE RENAISSANCE ERA
The duration time for The Middle Ages tourism era was from
5th to 14th centuries and The Renaissance Era was 14th to 16th
centuries. Traveling almost became risky in the era. This
resulted in splitting of an organized systems which affected the
transportation systems, currencies and languages which then
become difficult to travel. The transportation and safety of
tourists were declined in The Middle Ages. They were left with
fewer options for currencies exchange and there were almost
no knowledge of the language.
The traveling came back to life in The Renaissance Era (14th –
16th centuries). They brought larger areas under their control
and opened the routes for trades and commercial activities.
1.6 INDUSTRIAL AND MODERN TOURISM
With the industrial revolution a lot of factories and lands were built along with the libraries,
cultural and economic buildings. The textile industry was totally changed and the employment
opportunities for locals were getting increased. Industries were built on the urban side of the
cities which put an impact on the development of urban side.
Modern tourism brought better experience in terms of sightseeing, exploring natural beauty. The
beginning of 21st century helped in targeting and completing the objectives of giving the best
experience to the tourist. Modern tourists seek quality service and wide options for traveling.
They are experienced travelers which help them in deciding what to expect in today’s modern
era and are more open towards the environmental and cultural values and respects them. Their
demand for better experience, flexibility in traveling and adaptability keeps the tourism industry
on continuing to maintain the quality and focus on ‘value for money’ for the visitors.
1.7 FACTORS AFFECTING GROWTH OF TOURISM NDUSTRY
Tourism industry plays a vital role in the planning and development
of a country including both the positive and negative impact on the
economy. Primary tourism resources are key attraction of a city or
an area that is built, which is the main reason for people to travel.
These factors are as follows:
1. Climate - It is the reason people choose to visit any specific
country or a city.
2. Natural Environment – Some of the examples are Bali Island in Indonesia, mountains
in Switzerland and Arabian Sea in Karachi.
Middle ages and Renaissance
era, Tourism History
Lahore Fort
11| P a g e
3. Built Environment – Eiffel Tower in Paris and Petronas Towers in Kuala Lumpur are
the best examples of built environment affecting
the growth of tourism in these countries.
4. Historic Sites –Lahore Fort, Shalimar Bagh,
Makli Necropolis, Frere Hall in Karachi and
Great Wall of China aresome of the examples of
historical sites.
5. Religious Centers – Lumbini in Nepal, a major
pilgrimage for Buddhist and Mecca for Muslims
are some of the examples as religious tourism.
Secondary tourism factors which affects the growth and evolution of tourism industry includes:
 Hotels and guesthouses
 Shopping malls
 Restaurants and Cafes
 Transport
 Adventure activities
 Theme parks
 Entertainment
1.8 TYPES OF TOURISM
Types of tourism includes the activity of traveling for leisure purpose to going for a business
meeting to another city or a country. Tourism act as a way of spending time away from home in
search of recreation activities or relaxation. There are three basic forms of tourism such as;
domestic tourism, inbound tourism and outbound tourism.
DOMESTIC TOURISM
Domestic tourism means people traveling within the country or a place of residence. A tourist
travels to places of attraction but stays in a place of residence is known as Domestic Tourism.
INBOUND TOURISM
Inbound tourism is defined as the activities of non-residents traveling to another country from the
place of the residence, outside the usual environment is known as Inbound Tourism.
Theme Park in PakistanA shopping mall in Karachi
Mecca Pilgrimage
12 | P a g e
OUTBOUND TOURISM
Outbound tourism is defined as traveling from one
country to another. A tourist who is traveling
internationally is both an outbound tourist because
they are traveling outside of the residence as well as
an inbound tourist because they are entering into
another country.
1.9 TRENDS OF TRAVEL AND TOURISM
Travel and Tourism Industry revolves around the continuous change of trends in the world, from
the rise of electronic media to sustainable hotels, digital guest experiences to the rising nature of
countries in terms of technology, everything is built around tourism industry. Building new
shopping malls, increase in restaurant industry, with the culinary tourism getting on top of the
list for the visitors, the trends of tourism industry is evolving with time. Tourism industry still
has a huge potential to grow and contributes towards the economy of a country. Some of the new
shapes and trends affecting the tourism industry of Pakistan and around the world are as follows.
 Digital Technology–Tourist and tour operators both are equipped with the latest
technologies which helps them to get the best experience. Making the operations smooth
for example, managing online bookings, and
tourists using currency converter apps and
language translation apps etc.
 Luxury Tourism –It is mainly related to
wealthy business tourists, who spend their
money on luxurious items, like spending time on
an island for leisure purpose after a hectic
meeting or to explore the area in a luxurious
manner.
 Culinary Tourism – People like to travel to enjoy food of different traditions and
different cuisines. They attend food festivals and food exhibitions like Gulfood Dubai
2020, in Dubai World Trade Centre.
1.10 NATIONAL TOURISM MAP
The map features geographical graphics of more than 50 tourist attractions in Pakistan. Some of
the names from the below map are Khunjerab Pass indicated as Pak – China border, Baltit Fort in
Activity:
 Make an individual
presentation on an Inbound
and Outbound Tourism.
Activity:
 Make a group presentation
on Trends of Tourism in
Pakistan and around the
world.
13| P a g e
Hunza Valley, Shangri-La Skardu, Neelum Valley in Kashmir, Lake SaifulMuluk, Khyber Pass
in Peshawar, Pakistan Monument which is one of the most visited destination in Islamabad,
Faisal Mosque, Badshahi Mosque in Lahore (one of the oldest and historic mosque), Mohenjo-
Daro (built in 2500 BCE) and Clifton Beach in Karachi etc. are one of many spots you can visit
in Pakistan and can identify the cities and places with the help of our national map.A new
political map was presented by our current Prime Minister Imran Khan on Aug 4 considering
Kashmir to be a part of Pakistan as stated by our Prime Minister.
1.11 VISITORS AND TOURISTS
1.11.1 WHY DO PEOPLE TRAVEL?
People travel for many reasons like traveling from one place
to another for fun or leisure purpose, to meet their relatives
or to go on a religious trip. Tourist’s wants new experiences
in lives thus they choose to travel around the world.
Traveling helps in admiring the beauty of nature, visit other
continents and discover new ways of life, meeting new
people and getting to know about the culture and traditions.
Some people also travel to study geography, while some
travel to learn new languages and discover new places for
adventure.
National Tourism Map – Pakistan
Activity:
 Enlist all the tourist
attractions from the
national map of
Pakistan and write few
lines
Political map of Pakistan, 2021
14 | P a g e
1.12 FACTORS THAT INFLUENCE TRAVELING
There are some important factors that influence and motivate people to travel. Some of them are
as follows:
1. PHYSICAL MOTIVATION
Physical motivation is related to the relaxation of mind and refreshment of body. People
also travel for health purposes while some of them travel for sports and leisure activity.
2. INTERPERSONAL MOTIVATION
Interpersonal motivation or skills require to meet new people, visiting old friends and
seek new experiences. People travel to learn new languages and to adapt them in their
usual lifestyle.
3. CULTURAL MOTIVATION
People tend to learn and know about different cultural values,to have a passion of
knowing about others lifestyle, their music, art, food and dance, etc.
Other motivations that influence traveling can be educational purpose or finding a new job in a
new country.
1.13 DIFFERENCE BETWEEN TOURIST AND VISITOR
A visitor is simply someone who is visiting a new place or a person for a specific period of time.
A visitor can be someone who visits a school, an office for work purpose and in a city with
specific approach etc. A guest who pays visit to your house can also be called a visitor.
A tourist is someone who travels for the specific purpose of leisure or stays for a longer period of
time as compared to a visitor. All tourists are visitors as they travel and visit other countries or
places they are not familiar with, usually as vacation which is normally far away from their
home.
A visitor could be anyone including your neighbors as well. Not all visitors can be tourists.
Tourists are very much motivated to travel for multiple purposes such as recreation, pleasure,
sports, business or meeting family members.
15| P a g e
SUMMARY
Tourism consist of the activities of person traveling and staying in a place outside the usual
environment for leisure, business and other purposes mentioned in this chapter. Tourism industry
changed from the time of roman era to the 21st century, with the growing demand of national and
international tourism. People are influenced to travel by factors such as physical and cultural
motivation etc. Tourism industry is rapidly growing and will keep getting better with time,
providing cultural values, economic growth and the knowledge of traditional values to the
visitors.
Key Words
 Tourism
 Attractions
 1eisure
 Economy
 PTDC
 Traits
 Intangibility
 Perishability
 Demographic
 UNWTO
EXERCISE
 Visit any famous manmade attraction in your city and share pictures of it in your class
 Visit different national tourist attractions in small groups
 Spot in internationally known tourist attraction on google earth and share information
about it with your class
 Make a chart of famous tourist attractions in Pakistan
Choose the correct answer
1. Tourism helps a country in improving its:
a. economy c. lifestyle
b. tourist d. growth
2. Which is NOT a purpose of traveling in tourism industry?
a. Sports purpose c. Religious purpose
b. Leisure purpose d. Growth purpose
3. Things which cannot be seen or touched, are called:
a. intangible c. perishability
b. tangible d. invisible
16 | P a g e
4. Traveling came back to life in:
a. Renaissance era c. Greek era
b. Ancient era d. Roman era
5. Outbound tourism means a person traveling:
a. outside of a country c. traveling within cities
b. traveling by bus d. traveling by car
Write short answers to the following questions.
1. Define tourism.
2. Enlist the factors involved in evolution of tourism?
3. What is a national map?
4. Write down a paragraph on Tourism Industry of Pakistan.
5. What is the difference between a tourist and a visitor?
6. Why do people travel?
7. Make a list of tourist attractions you would like to visit.
Give detailed answers to the following questions.
1. Key words are given below, find definitions of each one of them along with the
examples.
Tourism
Leisure
Business Travel
Mode of Transportation
Tourist
Visitor
2. Describe tourism industry and its characteristics.
3. Explain some of the factors that have caused the increase in tourism in Pakistan.
4. Write down the recent trends in tourism industry in Pakistan.
5. Explain the economic importance of tourism industry.
17| P a g e
Chapter 2 Adventure Tourism
Students’ Learning Outcomes
After studying this chapter you will be able to:
 understand the adventure tourism
 know about advantages and disadvantages of adventure tourism
 learn essential steps of hiking
 know about hiking skills
 know threats and challenges
 learn how to identify location for camping
 ensure safety and security for camping
18 | P a g e
ADVENTURE TOURISM
Adventure means an exciting or an exceptional
experience that involve activities such as traveling,
exploring and participating in different sports
activities. Adventure tourism is defined as moving
from one area to another especially outside of the
comfort zone to explore or travel to remote or
unusual areas. Tourist enjoy different activities
such as; skydiving, scuba diving, hiking trip,
boating, paragliding, bungee jumping etc.
Adventure tourism combines physical activity while allowing the tourists to interact with the
beauty of nature. One of the main reason why people travel and go for an adventure is to reduce
the stress and they feel much happier when they come back from the trip.
2.1 ADVANTAGES OF ADVENTURE TOURISM
Adventure tourism has its own advantages and disadvantages for the tourists and country as well.
Following are the advantages of adventure tourism.
Economic
The revenue generated from adventure tourism helps in the betterment of economy of a country
especially at local and national level by creating opportunities for the development of businesses.
Job Opportunities
Adventure tourism helps in creating the job opportunities for the locals at different levels
including hotels, restaurants and travel services etc. The adventure tourism restore businesses
which generate new jobs and can raise more revenue at local/regional/national levels.
Environmental
It can provide financial incentives in order to keep the environment green and clean. Healthy
environment is an important factor affecting the growth of tourism industry. Revenue from
adventure tourism helps in maintaining and preserving the environment in both rural and urban
areas.
19| P a g e
Promotional
Adventure tourism gives people more options of traveling destinations by promoting the natural
beauty all over the world. If a traveler wants to go for a bungee jumping they know exactly
where to go.
2.2 DISADVANTAGES OF ADVENTURE TOURISM
Following are the disadvantages of adventure tourism.
Environmental
Tourism can often cause environmental
damages with the risk of pollution and the
loss of natural habitats and sometimes forest
fires. Old monuments and museums face
difficulties managing heavy crowd of
tourists and ending up in worse condition
than before.
Cultural
Tourist often forget to adapt the culture of a country due to lack of cultural awareness, local
traditions as well as community habits.
Tourism Dependence
Tourism becomes so important for some countries that they start relying on tourism as their main
source of economy and stop focusing on other areas. Country’s economy is then left with less
choice of depending on other sources of income and making it difficult for the locals.
2.2 HIKING/TREKKING
Hiking means a long and healthy walk, usually on trails or
in a countryside. Whereas, trekking means to go on an
adventurous journey in wild natural areas for multiple
days. Trekking does not necessarily require hiking trails.
20 | P a g e
IMPORTANT STEPS OF HIKING
It is important to plan before going on a hiking trip to avoid any kind of risk or injury. Following
are the important steps of hiking.
1. Pick the Perfect Hike
There are plenty of hiking trial options in different countries.
Pick the easiest, shortest and safest trail and make sure not to
go alone for the safe side.
2. Plan Properly
Planning is always a good idea when engaging in an outdoor
activity. The small things to consider before leaving for hiking
would really help in making it easy, it gives more confidence
through the journey. Things to consider are; check if the weather
is going to be sunny or is it going to rain,making sure to know
the best time to go and what kind of clothes are required for
hiking. Consider such things will help in making it a memorable
trip.
3. Taking the Hiking Essentials
Hiking requires some essential tools and equipment’s such as:
hiking backpack, appropriate shoes/boots, food and water and
first-aid kit etc.
4. Resting A Bit
It takes a lot of energy when going on a hiking trail. In order to make it an enjoyable trip it is
better to know when to stop for water or a small meal break. While resting for a while it is best to
take off the shoes and cool down a little. Do a quick massage around the calves which will
prevent the feet from swelling. Rest for a while but make sure not to sit for too long, which will
eventually make you feel tired and lazy.
5. Take the Right Food
The average hike burns 400-500 calories an hour so this means to have enough food items along
the trip. Make sure to grab some salty snack for lost sweat which will replace it. Don’t pack too
many items or if the plan is to complete the trail then make sure to carry sufficient snack and
water throughout the journey.
21| P a g e
CHALLENGES AND THREATS
Hiking gives a best experience and adventure to the tourist
but at the same time it is a huge challenge as well. Many
countries have more than one trail options for tourists, so
they can enjoy whatever trail they want to experience.
Threats are obviously the part of wild nature. As people go
more forward in hiking through the trails they start seeing
different animals, the most common are different breeds of
monkeys found in woods. Another challenge is the change of
weather and temperature. It is important to check the weather
forecast regardless of the season and choose the hiking clothes
accordingly. Land sliding also causes risk and difficulty for
hikers with unusual ground movement and rockfalls, which
makes it difficult to hike on the track especially in rainy
season.
2.3 CAMPING
Camping while on a hiking trip requires some basics factors that needs to be consider. Choose an
easy destination that is safe and take essential things that will be needed during camping and
store healthy food and water during the stay. Basic principles of camping are:
 Use a map and a compass to avoid getting lost
 Travel and camp on a strong surface
 Leave rocks, plants and other natural objects in its actual state
 Campfires cause lasting impact to the environment. Use lightweight stove for cooking
and candle lanterns for light
Source: Pakistan point
Source: worldexpeditions.com
22 | P a g e
SUMMARY
Tourists travel widely in search of reliable tourist destinations that can provide unique tourism
experience. Adventure tourists are motivated to go on a holiday for the same reason as leisure
tourists that are motivated by reasons such as personal development, excitement, experiencing
different cultures and socializing. Adventure tourists look for the experience that involve
discovery of rare and wild destination environments and suitable natural resources.
Key Words
 Adventure
 Hiking
 Trekking
 Paragliding
 Challenges
 Threats
 Camping
 Location
EXERCISE
 Plan a hiking trip on a weekend with family or friends and share your experience in class
along with different pictures
 Plan a camping trip in groups and choose the right location and explain why you think it
is the most suitable place
Choose the correct answer
1. Adventure tourism is another form of:
a. leisure activity c. risk activity
b. vacation activity d. trip activity
2. People go for an adventure to:
a. reduce workload c. learn about culture
b. reduce stress d. to learn new language
3. Hiking is done in areas such as:
a. Parks c. Roads
b. Trails d. Jogging track
4. Choosing the right location for ______ is important.
a. traveling c. resting
b. walking d. camping
23| P a g e
5. Adventure tourism include:
a. bungee jumping c. traveling
b. walking d. swimming
6. Adventure tourism impacts the _____ of a country.
a. development c. nature
b. economy d. local community
Write short answers to the following questions.
1. What is hiking?
2. Define adventure tourism.
3. Write any 2 advantages and disadvantages of adventure tourism.
4. What is trekking?
5. What is meant by tourism dependence
6. What is bungee jumping?
7. What is the importance of planning before going on a hiking trip?
Give detailed answers to the following questions.
1. Explain adventure tourism along with examples.
2. Write down the threats and challenges of going on a hiking trip.
3. Explain how to identify proper location for camping.
4. Write down the difference between hiking and trekking?
5. Explain the effect of adventure tourism on an economy and environment of a country.
24 | P a g e
Chapter 3 Travel Services for Tourism
Students’ Learning Outcomes
After studying this chapter you will be able to:
 know about travel services in tourism areas
 learn about characteristics of travel services
 learn about reservation system and booking channels for tourist
 know about how booking channels works in tourism and hotel industry
 know about the role of travel agents
 understand the advantages and disadvantages of online travel booking agents
25| P a g e
Travel Services in Tourism Industry
Travel services means arranging or booking transportation, vacation or travel packages that
include ticketing and accommodation etc. Travel services plays an important role in helping the
tourism industry by giving more than one option for traveling. As the time changes, people were
given more and more choices and different means of transport were available. Since the start of
21st Century, almost anyone could travel due to the various options of traveling. Now people
have easy access to the traveling
world and staying in their financial
budget at the same time. Travel
services in tourism industry are the
services which are offered by the
travel agents through passenger
transport services, air travel
services, car services, rail transport
and sea transport services through
ships and boats. The travel and
tourism industry caters a large but slightly different group of people. Travel services in tourism
industry consists of the sub sectors which includes; travel agencies, tour brokers/guides, travel
agents, OTAs (Online Travel Agency) and GDS (Global Distribution System).
3.1 Characteristics of Travel Services
Travel services in tourism industry is made up of a complex variety of suppliers, tour operators,
tourism products, destination marketing organizations and travel agents. These service providers
have organizational skills and communication skills and know what to offer to different types of
travelers. Some of the main characteristic of a travel service providers are.
 Highly Organized – These service provider
shave to be a great planners and managers
to manage the tasks of bookings,
reservations and communicating with the
travelers.
 Vision – Having a vision makes it easy to
accommodate the customers. It is important
to have a proper vision to plan or manage a
trip.
 People Skills – Travel agents need to have
excellent communication skills and the
Information Box
 Before any other form of
transportation, humans
traveled on foot and then
learned to use animals as a
mode of transport. In 3500
BCE, the wheel was
invented and the first wheel
was made from wood.
Evolution of mode of transportation throughout history
26 | P a g e
ability to influence people. The role includes meeting new and
different people each time which requires skills of dealing each one of
them differently and making sure of the customer satisfaction.
 Social Knowledge – Service providers are
required to have more knowledge of the current
trends and demands. Competing with other travel
resources and information keeps them up-to-date
concerning the markets demand.
 Natural Explorers – Travel service providers
are required to have a great sense of traveling and
passion of exploring natural areas.
3.2 Reservation and Booking System (Channels)
People used to have limited knowledge of tourist destinations when planning a trip because of
the limited resources of gathering information at the time. Advanced technology made it easy to
understand for the travelers. Computer Reservation System (CRS) is one of the most widely used
technology in tourism industry. This system helps to promote and give the best and accurate
information about the availability, price and bookings of products and services.
There are 4 basic channels of distribution between a company and a traveler.
1. Retailers – Retailers role is to sell the product of the companies such as tickets and hotel
rooms and charge their fees or keep a few percent of the commission of total sale.
2. Wholesalers – Wholesalers work under travel agencies and provide discount on the fares
or some coupons which can be used next time.
DO YOU
KNOW?
 The shortest flight in
the world is between
island of Westray and
Papa Westray, Scotland
and lasts 2 minutes.
(source: ugpti.org)
27| P a g e
3. Travel Agents – Travel agents provide flexibility and additional opportunities to the
travelers such as giving more options in terms of date and time when booking a flight.
4. Online Travel Agencies (OTAs) – Bookings are made more convenient for the travelers
with online platforms. A person traveling does not have to step outside of the comfort
zone and can plan a trip through online platforms provided by the travel services or
agencies.
Some of the most common booking channels are Expedia, Booking.com and Trip Advisor. These
booking channels are known as Global Distribution System (GDS). They are connected with
different hotels around the world and book rooms for the travelers depending on the season. It is
easy for you to book rooms or get to know about the hotels and its view and location before
traveling to that place.
3.3 ROLE OF TRAVEL AGENTS
The role of travel agent sis to sell services such as
transportation and accommodation to a person or a
group of travelers and to help them plan, choose and
arrange a schedule trip. Travel agents work with clients
to determine the traveling needs and ensure to stay up-
to-date with tourism trends accordingly. Hotels and
other industries also benefit from the travel agents and
OTAs by the growing sales and promotions, making it
easy to cater the guests.
3.3.1Advantages of Online Travel Agents
There are few advantages and disadvantages of using the facilities of online travel agents. Some
of the advantages are.
 Online travel agents are easily accessible in any
corner of the world
 Travel agents reduce the workload for a traveler of
planning, budgeting and booking information
 Online travel agents plan your trip according to your
budget and ideas and the traveler just needs to
provide the basic details
 Mode of payment is easy and the risk of scam is
extremely low, a traveler can pay while staying in the
comfort zone through credit card or bank transfer.
Activity:
 Call a travel agent
and book a flight to
any destination.
Note key points of
communication and
share it in class
28 | P a g e
3.3.2 Disadvantages of Online Travel Agents
Following are the disadvantages of online travel agents.
 Commission rates are charged by travel agents on every booking
 Finding a reliable and trustworthy agent to plan your trip is difficult. A traveler needs to
make sure to choose the right travel agent for the trip
 Holiday packages through travel agents include busy and crowded places
SUMMARY
This chapter highlights the importance of travel services in tourism industry and the effect of
constant change in demand from the customers. The mode of transportation evolved with the
passage of time which made it easy for travelers to plan a trip without any difficulty. As
discussed in this chapter, travel services consist of different components including social
knowledge, people skills and few more along with the advantages and disadvantages of online
travel agents when planning to book a trip.
Key Words
 Travel
 Tour brokers
 Travel agents
 OTAs
 Visions
 Social Knowledge
 Natural explorers
 Retailers
 Wholesalers
EXERCISE
 Make a booking through OTAs and have a discussion in class on advantages and
disadvantages of online booking channels
 Contact any travel agency, book a demo flight and observe the points while talking to the
agent
Choose the correct answer
1. International airline of Pakistan is:
a. Serene Air c. PIA
b. Air blue d. Air sial
29| P a g e
2. CRS stands for:
a. Customer Research Support c. Computer Reservation Support
b. Computer Reservation System d. Customer Real Support
3. OTAs stands for:
a. Online Travel Agencies c. Online Tourism Agencies
b. Online Tour Agencies d. Online Touring Agencies
4. Booking channels are also called GDS which stands for:
a. Global dividing system c. Global distribution support
b. Global distribution system d. Global demanding system
5. Highly organized travel agents are:
a. great planners c. organized
b. good travelers d. good speaker
6. Natural explorers have great sense of:
a. traveling c. talking
b. tourism d. transportation
Write short answers to the following questions.
1. What is travel services?
2. What are the characteristics of travel services?
3. Define travel services in tourism industry.
4. What is the role of a retailer in reservation system?
5. Define GDS.
6. What is the role of online travel agent?
Give detailed answers to the following questions.
1. Explain the characteristics of travel services in tourism industry?
2. How does booking channels work in tourism industry?
3. Explain the advantages and disadvantages of online travel agents?
30 | P a g e
Chapter 4 Hospitality and Lodging
Students Learning Outcomes
After studying this chapter you will be able to:
 know about meanings and background of hospitality industry
 know about hospitality industry (scope, values, and traditions)
 understand the difference among hotel, restaurant, motel guesthouses, rest house
 know about types of hotels and lodging properties commercial and non-commercial
 classify hotels by type and location
 learn hotel rating systems
31| P a g e
Hospitality and Lodging Industry
The word hospitality is derived from the Latin word ‘hospes’ which means both a visitor and
stranger. Hospitality means to cater and serve the needs and wants of a guest or a visitor.
Whereas, lodging means to accommodate and provide a place to stay. The hospitality industry is
defined as a broad category of field in the service industry that includes different services such as
lodging, food and drink, event organizing, travel and tourism. Hospitality industry includes hotel,
motels, guesthouses, resorts, travel agencies and restaurants etc.
Historical Background of Hospitality Industry
The era of hospitality industry and its services began from 40 BC
during the time social and religious gatherings were very
common. It was the time when Greeks came up with different
ideas of providing facilities and relaxation to the travelers. After
the Greeks, the Roman era took place and provided different
facilities such as accommodation and entertainment for the
travelers. Hospitality industry then revived in Colonial Period in
the Late 1700s and the services started to shape in a very different way. Hospitality and lodging
industry experienced a significant improvement in terms of economic and environmental
development over the years. The various social and traditional changes along with the increase in
cultural diversity were part of the changes in hospitality industry. Bed and breakfast were
developed during the 18th Century, coffee shops became very popular at the time for tourists and
many Inns and guesthouses were built for the travelers.
4.1 Scope of Hospitality Industry
The hospitality industry consists of broad category of services
that includes lodging, food & beverage, travel & tourism and
recreation.
Lodging
Lodging means different types of accommodation facilities such
as hotels, motels, guesthouses, inns and resorts. Lodging sector
provides shelter ora place for travelers to stay for one or more
nights. The scope of lodging sector in hospitality industry is
increasing each year by providing employment opportunities in
different areas such as; accommodation manager, event manager,
front desk manager, sales and marketing and customer service etc.
DO YOU KNOW?
- Thermal baths
were introduced
by Greeks in 40
BC.
32 | P a g e
Food and Beverage
Food & Beverage sector is also known as F&B. It is the
largest sector of hospitality industry, consisting of the sub
sectors such as; restaurants, cafes, coffee shops, tea shops,
food stalls, catering services etc. Food and beverage services
are essential for any hospitality establishment and consist a
wider scope of career opportunities. An individual can apply
in many different categories of food and beverage such as;
catering companies, airlines, chefs, restaurant managers, food
production and processing companies etc.
Travel and Tourism
Travel and tourism is a versatile industry consists of
wider scope in different fields such as travel agents
and agencies, tour brokers or tour guides. Cruises are
also a part of travel and tourism industry because the
primary role of a cruise is to take the passengers from
one place to another while providing the
accommodation and food and beverage services in it.
The scope of travel and tourism in career
development is vast and it provide opportunities in
different areas like airlines, transportation, traveling
agencies and cruises etc.
Recreation
Recreation is an activity that people do for rest, relaxation or enjoyment. Recreation activity
helps to freshen the mind and the body of a person. It includes activities such as visiting
amusement parks, riding a rollercoaster, watching movies in a theatre, fishing etc.
4.2 Values and Traditions of Hospitality Industry
Hospitality industry refers to an organizational structure that includes cultural beliefs, values and
attitude. It is important to serve guests with a warm feeling of serving them with kindness in a
traditional manner of a hotel. It affects the customer service and improves the overall experience.
4.3 Difference between Hotel Motel Guesthouses and Restaurant
Following are the differences between the sub sectors of hospitality industry.
33| P a g e
Hotels
A hotel is an establishment that primarily focuses on providing accommodation to guest along
with other facilities and services. Before hotels in the mid-17th century, Inns were served as a
place for lodging facilities. The concept of hotel began to grow in 19th century.
Hotels are also known as ‘a home away from home’. Hotels provide different services and
facilities such as room service, restaurants, meeting rooms, event halls, fitness center, swimming
pool, business center etc.
Motels
The word ‘Motel’ is the combination of motorway and
hotel. A motelis an establishment that provide basic
facilities and services such as bed and breakfast, open
car parking and laundry services to the guest. Motels are
usually built on the suburban side of the city. The
difference between a motel and hotel is that hotels are
usually large buildings with different room types on each
floor. Hotels also provide multiple facilities to the guest
such as different restaurants, swimming pool, valet car
parking, banquet halls etc. Whereas, motels provide
limited services to the guest that only includes basic necessities.
Guest Houses
Guest houses are traditionally small and privately owned
establishments. Guesthouses have fewer rooms as compared to
the hotels and are generally located in the residential areas.
Guesthouses are less expensive with limited services and usually
cater families who are traveling on a budget.
Restaurants
A restaurant is an eatery business or place where people have a
dining experience away from homes and to change the usual
routine for a day. Restaurants only focuses on serving food and
drinks to the guests without providing accommodation facilities.
Meals are generally prepared and served in a restaurant kitchen
but also offer take-out and food delivery systems to the guests.
34 | P a g e
4.4Lodging Operations (Commercial & Non-Commercial)
Lodging operations focuses on hotels, motels, bed and breakfast and resorts. Examples of non-
commercial lodging service providers are guest houses, hostels, panahgah etc.
4.4.1 Types of Hotels and Its Classification
Classification and type of a hotel is determined by the size and location of the building structure,
functions, level of service, amenities and industry standards. Some of the hotels that can be
classified according to its type and location are as follows.
City Center/Downtown Hotels
City center or downtown hotels are generally located in the heart of city
within a short distance from the business hub and shopping
malls. These type of hotels are generally expensive because
of their prime location.
Motels
They are located primarily on a highway or motorway and
target guests who are traveling by road. Motels provide
limited accommodation and food and beverage services along with other amenities.
Airport Hotels
Airport hotels are also known as transit hotels and focus on guests who are traveling from one
destination to another and does not prefer to stay far from the airport due to frequent traveling.
Resorts
A resort is a place that offers relaxation and recreation facilities to the guest. Resorts are known
for its large size properties and typically offer more facilities than just accommodation and food.
Resorts often have indoor and outdoor activities,
club lounge, water and amusement park, sports and
fitness centers etc.
Floating Hotels/Flotels
Flotel is a combination of the word float and hotel,
 Amenities are
facilities provided by
a hotel such as Wi-Fi,
TV, fridge, soap,
shampoo, towels etc.
DO YOU
KNOW?
Activity:
 Visit a budgeted hotel or a
restaurant in your city and
share your experience with
your teacher
35| P a g e
which means a hotel that is floating above water and are generally established on luxury cruises
or ships. The rooms are small as they are built inside the ships but offer full-services to the guest.
Budget Hotels
A hotel that provides minimum amenities and services to the guest. Budget friendly hotels offer
lower price than a normal hotel. These type of hotels meet the basic need of a guest by providing
comfortable and clean room with basic facilities.
Luxury Hotels
Luxury hotels provide luxurious facilities and services to the guest, offering multiple restaurants
and VIP lounges, excellent concierge service and dining facilities. The rooms consist of
luxurious furnishing and high amenities. The main target audience for these hotels are
celebrities, businessmen and high ranking politicians.
4.5Hotel Rating System
Rating system is often used to classify hotels according
to the facilities and level of services provided by an
establishment. Star classification is typically used to
rate a hotel from 1 to 5 with 1 means lowest and 5
means highest. A one star hotel means that it provides
basic facilities to the guest and average services. A two
and three star hotel also provides limited facilities and
typically offer better services. A four star hotel
provides multiple facilities and services to the guests, and offer above average amenities and
services. A five star hotel caters the need and wants of a guest in a luxurious manner. Five star
hotels offers multiple facilities and services to guests at a very high level such as personalized
services and luxurious dining experiences etc.
Activity:
 Make a phone call to
different hotels and ask them
what is the star rating of
their hotels and why?
36 | P a g e
SUMMARY
The chapter introduced different sides of a hospitality and lodging industry, giving an overview
of hospitality background and its beginning. The broad categories of hospitality industry gives an
option to take advantage of it in terms of career opportunities. Lodging properties can be
classified according to various criteria such as price, functions, location, types and the level of
services and facilities. Types of lodging properties according to price include full-service and
luxury hotels. The location category include classification of properties such as motels or resorts.
This chapter also covers the type of hotels according to the start rating system from one star to
five star hotel depending on the level of services and facilities it offers.
Key Words
 Tourism
 Leisure
 Religious
 Hospitality
 Inconsistency
 People-oriented
 Trough
 UNWTO
 Roman Era
 Greek Era
 Revenue
 Traits
 Intangibility
 Perishability
 Inseparability
 Hotels
 Motels
 PTDC
 Evolution
 Trends
EXERCISE
 Visit a hotel in your city and share your experience in class
 Ask hotel staff about the star rating of the hotel and ask them why they consider
themselves in that category
Choose the correct answer
1. A five star hotel means it has all the _______ amenities and services.
a. luxurious c. basic
b. limited d. cheap
2. Hotel star rating is classified according to its:
a. Services only c. Area
b. Facilities and services d. City
37| P a g e
3. Lodging sector include:
a. Restaurants c. Cafés
b. Hotel and motels d. Coffee shops
4. _____ Hotels offer high end facilities and services.
a. Budget c. Airport
b. Downtown d. Luxury
5. Guest houses have _____ rooms as compared to hotels.
a. fewerc. better
b. more d. equal
6. A hotel means ‘a home away from ____’.
a. workplace c. normal environment
b. home d. family
Write short answers to the following questions.
1. Define hotel sector
2. What is the difference between a hotel and motel?
3. Write any 3 types of hotels in Pakistan.
4. Which is the highest star rating hotel in Pakistan?
5. What is an airport hotel?
6. What is a motel?
7. What is the difference between 2 and 5 star hotel?
Give detail answers to the following questions.
1. Explain hospitality industry and its background.
2. Explain the scope of hospitality industry.
3. Differentiate:
 Hotel
 Motel
 Guest house
 Restaurant
4. Describe the type of hotels and lodging operations (commercial and non-commercial).
5. Explain hotel rating system.
38 | P a g e
Chapter 5 Heritage Cultural Tourism Management
Students Learning Outcomes
After studying this chapter you will be able to:
 know cultural and heritage tourism
 understand the importance of cultural heritage tourism
 learn cultures and heritage sites of Pakistan
 know about impact of cultural and heritage sites on tourism industry
 understand the roles of different organization working on culture and heritage tourism
(national and international organization working cultural heritage i.e. UNESCO, WWF)
 understand needs of tourists for cultural and heritage tourism
39| P a g e
INTRODUCTION
Cultural and heritage tourism is defined as tourism in which tourist focuses on seeking,
observing, learning and having the knowledge of different cultural attractions and products of a
tourism destination. Cultural heritage includes the architectural work, cooking activities, music
and festivals, historical events, heritage sites, monuments, museums, religious venues and
wildlife. Heritage tourism refers to tangible and intangible cultural, historical and natural
elements as a use of tourism resources. It includes all tangible elements such as houses, museums
and archaeological objects. Whereas, intangible elements includes language, music, festivals,
religion, food, etc.
5.1 Importance of Cultural Heritage Tourism
Cultural heritage tourism represents the identity of a
certain group or community. A large number of people
visit cultural and historical sites that help in improving
economic development of a country and creating more
job opportunities. Culture and heritage both plays a
great part in generating revenue for the countries
because tourists often stay longer and spend a lot of
time and money on experiencing and learning cultural
heritage of a country. It is a way of connecting with
other people through social values, beliefs, religion and
customs.
Heritage is mainly categorized into two main types.
 Natural heritage
 Cultural heritage.
5.1.1 NATURAL HERITAGE
Natural heritage refers to the natural aspects like beach, landscapes and national parks of a
country. Natural heritage attract tourists to visit and discover the natural attractions and sights.
40 | P a g e
5.1.2 CULTURAL HERITAGE
Cultural heritage means ways of living that a community developed through ideas, concept and
behavior. Cultural heritage in Pakistan includes archaeological sites, shrines, tombs, monuments
and places of worship. The cultural heritage of Pakistan consists of the following characteristics.
 Language
 Literature and poetry
 Dress and food
 Arts and architecture
 Handicrafts
5.2CULTURES AND HERITAGE SITES OF PAKISTAN
The United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO) is an
organization and its main purpose is to seek cultural peace and develop sustainability through
education, the sciences, communication and information. UNESCO listed six sites in Pakistan as
World Heritage Sites that are as follows.
1. Archeological Ruins at Mohenjo-Daro
2. Buddhist Ruins of Takht-i-Bahi and Sahr-i-Bahlol
3. Taxila
4. Rohtas Fort (Jhelum)
5. Lahore Fort and Shalimar Garden
6. Makli Hill (Thatta
Hingol National Park, Makran
Coastal Central Karakoram National Park,
Skardu
41| P a g e
Mohenjo-Daro means ‘the mound of the dead’. It is an
archaeological site in the province of Sindh. It was one of
the largest settlements of the ancient Indus Valley
Civilization. Mohenjo-Daro was one of the earliest major
cities but soon it was abandoned in the 19th Century BCE
due to the declining of Indus Valley Civilization but later
rediscovered in 1920s.
Takht-i-Bahi means throne of water spring and it is
located in Mardan, Khyber-Pakhtunkhwa. It was listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in
1980.
Taxilais also an archaeological site with the same name of city and it lies about 32 km north-
west of Islamabad and Rawalpindi.
Rohtas Fortis a 16th Century fortress located near the city of Jhelum and is one of the largestfort
in subcontinent. It is an example of early Muslim military architecture in central and south Asia.
Source: fhmpakistan.com
(Pakistani Culture and
Traditions)
42 | P a g e
Lahore Fort and Shalimar Gardensare located in Lahore, Punjab. Shalimar gardens were built
by the Mughal royal family for the purpose of entertaining guests. Lahore Fort is also known as
ShahiQila andis located at the northern end of walled city Lahore, containing 21 notable
monuments.
Makli Hill is one of the largest funerary sites in the world and it covers almost the total area of
10 kilometers near the city of Thatta, Sindh. The large part of Makli belongs to royal Sufi saints
and famous scholars. It was listed as a UNESCO World Heritage Site in 1981.
5.3 Impact of Culture and Heritage Sites on Tourism Industry
The importance of cultural heritage on
tourism industry plays a crucial role in
economic development of a country.
Tourism industry benefits from cultural
heritage in a financial way and also
develop a unique connection between the
tourists and the locals by encouraging
them to have more respect for each other
and the cultural heritage itself.
Activity:
 Make a list of some famous cultural and heritage sites of Pakistan
Activity:
 Enlist the factors you will consider while visiting cultural heritage sites
43| P a g e
5.4 Role of Different Organization in Cultural and Heritage Tourism
Site Location Important features
 Archaeological
ruins at Taxila
 Archaeological
ruins at Mohenjo-
Daro
 Shalimar Garden
 Rohtas Fort
 Rawalpindi, district
of Punjab
 right bank of the
Indus river
 City of Lahore
 North of Pakistan,
province of Punjab
 Caves and Buddhist
monasteries
 Representation of
metropolis
civilization
 Mughal artistic
expression
 12 monumental
gateways
5.5UNESCO
UNESCO: United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural
Organization was established on 16 November, 1945. The role
of UNESCO is to ensure the peace through international
cooperation in Education, Science and Culture. Focusing on the
tourism industry, the organization itself made sure to spread the
natural and cultural tourism both in every part of the world, for
tourists to discover new attraction sites and for the locals to
benefit from it. Pakistan has been very much involved as a
member of UNESCO’s board since 1978. The role of UNESCO is to preserve natural and
cultural heritage of a country by ensuring the maintaining system of ancient archeological sites
(which are previously discussed), and they are only achieved through proper education and tools.
5.6 WWF
The World Wide Fund for Nature (WWF)is an
International but non-governmental organization and it
was founded on 29 April, 1961. WWF is one of the largest
independent organization and it focuses on reducing the
human impact on an environment and to build a future
around natural and eco-friendly areas.WWF works in
nearly 100 countries and collaborate with people around
the world to develop and deliver creative solutions to
protect communities, wildlife, and the place where they
live.
44 | P a g e
5.6 Understand Needs of Tourists for Cultural and Heritage Tourism
It is important that tourists visit cultural heritage sites to keep the opportunities open for the local
community by creating jobs, strengthening local economy and to promote the awareness of
culture and heritage of any tourist destination.
SUMMARY
Cultural heritage plays an important role in the growth of tourism industry. Travelers learn a lot
about cultural values and heritage of a country through its music, festivals, historical sites,
religious venues, etc. Natural heritage include beaches, landscapes, and all the natural beauty of a
country. Whereas, cultural heritage includes language, literature, food, dress, handicrafts, etc. It
helps in the economic development of a country and create job opportunities for the locals.
UNESCO, WWF and other organization works in maintaining and protecting the natural and
socio-cultural environment of heritage sites while promoting cultural values I every corner of the
world.
Key Words
 Culture  Heritage
 UNESCO  WWF
 Coral gardens  Archaeological
 Rohtas Fort  Makli Hill
 Takht-i-Bahi
 Intangible
 Civilization
 Tangible
EXERCISE
 Identify and visit few cultural heritage sites in your city
 Explore your school building with your classmates and demonstrate your finding as a
Tour guide to your class
 Plan a school tour to explore different classes and act as a tour guide
 Locate cultural and heritage sites on a map
Choose the correct answer
1. Rohtas Fort is located near the city of ______.
a. Peshawar c. Jhelum
b. Faisalabad d. Multan
45| P a g e
2. UNESCO was established in ______.
a. 1945 c. 1946
b. 1947d. 1948
3. WWF stands for:
a. World Wide Food c. World Wide Function
b. World Wide Fund d. World Wide Foundation
4. UNESCO listed ____ sites in Pakistan as World Heritage Sites.
a. 6 c. 7
b. 8d. 9
5. Cultural heritage affects the _____ development of a country.
a. economic c. culture
b. touristd. tourism
6. Arts and handicraft are characteristics of ______.
a. Cultural heritage c. Socio-culture
b. Natural heritage d. world heritage
Write short answers to the following questions.
1. What is meant by cultural heritage?
2. Where is Mohenjo-Daro located?
3. What is Makli Hill and how much area does it cover?
4. Define natural heritage.
5. What is UNESCO?
6. Enlist cultural heritage sites in Pakistan.
Give detail answers to the following questions.
1. Write down the importance of cultural heritage in tourism industry.
2. Explain the role of UNESCO in cultural heritage.
3. Describe the role of WWF in maintaining natural environment.
4. Write down the impact of culture and heritage on tourism industry.
46 | P a g e
Chapter 6 Tourist Transport Services
Students’ Learning Outcomes
After studying this chapter you will be able to:
 know about the different modes of transportation
o land based
o water based
o air travel
 understand management of transport facilities and services for tourists
 ensure safety and maintenance of the vehicles
 understand assumed risks and hazards during travel in hilly areas
o brake fails
o land sliding
o snow falling
o flooding
47| P a g e
6.1 MODES OF TRANSPORTATION
Mode of transportation means the movement of goods or a person
from one place to another through different ways of
transportation such as by air, by road and through water-based
transport.
Land or road based transport is one of the most common ways of
traveling from one place to another. Cars, buses, taxis and
railways are some of the transportation services frequently used by
both the locals and tourists. Land based transportation is cheaper,
easily accessible and available.
Water-based transportation was one of the earliest form of
traveling. In today’s world traveling through ships and cruises
are known to be the most luxurious and expensive way of
traveling. Boats and ferries are usually used for the
transportation of goods. The most luxurious mode of water
based transportation are Cruises which also helps in increasing
tourism activity.
Air traveling is one of the most common transportation
service for traveling from one destination to another. It is
the fastest mode of transportation, which covers
maximum distance in shortest time. Air transport does
not need a specific surface track to operate. Some of the
examples of air transport are airplanes, jets, helicopters,
hot air balloons (for leisure purpose) and parachutes etc.
48 | P a g e
6.4 Management of Transport Facilities and Services for Tourists
Transportation plays an important part in tourism industry. Transportation works as a bridge
between tourists and various tourist attractions. Better transportation facilities helps the tourist
making it easy for them to travel without worrying to go from one place to another.
6.3INTRODUCTION TO SAFETY STANDARDS
It is important to ensure the safety and maintenance of a vehicle before having to travel. Vehicles
should be timely maintained in a way to avoid any mishap during the journey. Make sure the fuel
is full for traveling from one destination to the other. The driver should be active and proficient
with the skills and should stay alert all the time as the most common accidents or injuries happen
through road collisions. As tourism industry is on the rise many locals are buying cars and
renting it to the tourists on a day to day basis.
Some of the most common things to consider on vehicle maintenance are:
 Lights, indicators, and number plates must be kept clear and in good shape
 Headlights must be properly adjusted according to the weather
 Ensure seatbelts and mirrors are adjusted correctly before driving
 Ensure the luggage is properly stored before moving the vehicle
49| P a g e
6.3Traveling Risks and Hazards
Many tourists travel Pakistan each year mostly to
visit the northern areas. The natural beauty
attracts the tourists to further experience the
beauty of hills and mountains. But some areas
also consist of some risks and hazards for
tourists while traveling in different seasons.
Natural risks and hazards includes the risk of
Land sliding, which are most commonly be
found during the winter and snowy season. Land sliding causes hurdles to the vehicles by
blocking the road for the travelers to go further.
Snowfall sometimes get too intense in some areas of
Pakistan especially in some of the places such as
Ziarat, Hunza Valley, Skardu, NathiaGali,
NaranKaghan Valley, etc. Tourists tend to enjoy the
snowy weather but it also block the roads and make it
difficult for the travelers to continue the journey.
Flooding is another risk and hazard factor for tourists. It happens due to the heavy rain in the
area, causing the travelers to stop trip for a while. Flooding cause damages in almost every area
of work, shops, markets and restaurants.
Activity:
 Sometimes brakes maybe out of
order. What should a driver do in
this situation?
50 | P a g e
SUMMARY
The movement of goods and or people from one location to another using different ways such as
air, road and water-based transport is referred to as mode of transportation. It is necessary to
check the vehicle’s safety and maintenance if traveling by road. Vehicles should be serviced on a
regular basis to avoid any mishap on the road. As the tourism industry is growing, many locals
are acquiring cars to rent tourists as a service provider.
Key Words
 Hazards
 Safety
 Land sliding
 Transportation
 Vehicle
 Flooding
EXERCISE
 Visit different websites providing tourism transportation services
 Prepare maintenance checklist as per Safety Standards
 Enlist some of the safety measure you take while traveling through land transport
Choose the correct answer
1. Mode of transportation means the movement of _____ from one place to another.
a. goods c. services
b. Travelers. ships
2. Water-based transportation include:
a. ships and cruises c. sea
b. swimming d. containers
3. GDP stands for:
a. Global domestic product c. Gross domestic promotion
b. Gross domestic product d. Great distribution promotion
4. One of the example of air traveling is:
a. Jets c. Bungee jumping
b. jumping d. hot air balloons
5. Flooding happens when _____ occurs:
a. heavy rain c. bad weather
51| P a g e
b. moisture d. storm
6. There are ____ ways of transportation.
a. 2 c. 4
b. 3 d. 5
Write short answers to the following questions.
1. Define land based and water based transportation.
2. Give two examples of land based vehicles.
3. What is land sliding?
4. What is meant by air traveling?
5. When does land sliding occurs in Pakistan (Northern Areas)
6. How many ways of transportation are there?
7. What are some of the most common things to consider during vehicle maintenance
Give detail answers to the following questions.
1. Explain the importance of transportation.
2. Explain transportation facilities.
3. Explain the importance of safety and maintenance of the vehicles.
52 | P a g e
Chapter 7 Sustainable Tourism
Students Learning Outcomes
After studying this chapter you will be able to:
 define sustainable tourism
 understand difference between sustainable and eco-tourism
 understand environmental, economic, and socio-cultural aspects of tourism development
 understand importance of preserving heritage sites in Pakistan
 know different local/regional cultural heritage sites
 define eco-tourism
 identify suitable camping site in your locality
 understand the nature of eco-tourism
 know about financial benefits and empowerment for local community
53| P a g e
7.1 SUSTAINABLE TOURISM
The word sustainability means to maintain and preserve the natural, social, economic and
environmental need. Sustainable tourism is defined as the balance between environmental,
economic and socio-cultural aspects of tourism development. It plays an important role in
minimizing its impact on the environment and local culture, while contributing to generate
income, employment and the conservation of eco-tourism. Having a green and clean
environment is important for a country. For example solar electricity, which requires heat of the
sun for maximum time to generate the electricity while depending on natural resources. Other
examples of sustainable tourism in Pakistan are:
 Conservation of River Indus Dolphin through community based ecotourism
 Capacity building of Tourism Promotion Association of Kaghan Valley for the promotion
of sustainable tourism in the region
54 | P a g e
7.2 Difference between Sustainable and Eco-tourism
Eco-tourism is defined as a form of tourism that involves responsible travel to natural areas,
protecting the environment and improving the well-being of the local community. It refers to a
form of tourism that highlights all the natural-based environment which motivates the tourists to
observe and appreciate nature as well as traditional cultures in natural areas.
Ecotourism also supports the maintenance of natural areas which are used as ecotourism
attractions. Whereas, sustainable tourism refer to the environmental, economic and socio-cultural
aspects of tourism development. The role of sustainable tourism is to focus on current and future
economic, social and environmental impact as well as addressing the needs of the visitors and
communities.
7.2 Importance of Preserving Heritage Sites in Pakistan
Preservation means to protect and maintain the existence of something in its natural state for
example, protecting the natural environment of a country for the locals and the tourists. Heritage
sites plays an important role in tourism industry by keeping historical sites, buildings and object
in its natural shape. Preservation of national heritage sites are passed through different
generations that includes architecture, landscapes and other work of art. The role of National
Archaeological Department is to preserve national heritage sites in Pakistan. The only assets
which helps in the development of urban communities and also helps in promoting the culture. It
also helps in reducing poverty by creating income and employment opportunities. Heritage sites
are the sign of keeping culture of Pakistan and its values alive.
7.3 Local Heritage Sites
Local heritage means recognizing the local culture and heritage buildings which are within the
district. Cultural heritage sites that are located in Pakistan include Badshahi Mosque, Katas raj
temple, and Wazir Khan Mosque, Punjab. Ranikort Fort, Chaukandi tombs, and Port of Banbhor
are located in Sindh. Whereas, Karez cultural landscape, and Ziarat Juniper forest are some
cultural heritage sites located in Baluchistan.
7.3.1Regional Heritage Sites
Regional heritage sites include the archaeological site of Harappa that consist of low mountains
and graveyards to the south of Ravi River, Punjab. Mohenjo-Daro and historical monuments like
Makli that are located in Sindh. Rohtas Fort, Shalimar Gardens and Taxila are also located in
Punjab. Whereas, some other regional heritage sites include Baltit Fort (GilgitBaltistan),
archaeological site of Ranigat (Khyber Pakhtunkhwa) and archaeological site of Mehrgarh which
is located in Baluchistan.
55| P a g e
7.4ECO TOURISM
Ecotourism is defined as the responsibility of protecting
and strengthening the natural environment, improving
the lives of local communities and educate visitors.
Ecotourism minimizes the physical and social impact
and establishes environmental and cultural awareness,
providing a positive experience to both the locals and
the visitors. Pakistan is a very unique country which
possess various ecotourism attractions such as Baltoro
Glaciers and Hushe Valley that consist of all trekking and mountaineering tourism in Baltistan.
Baltoro Glaciers, Baltistan
Activity:
 Identify suitable camping site in your locality considering green and clean
environment
56 | P a g e
Hushe Valley, Baltistan
7.5NATURE OF ECO TOURISM
The ecotourism is preserved by the environment, while maintaining the cultural and social
quality of local communities. Tourists can have a great influence on the sustainability of tourism
by keeping the balance between maintaining the environment and cultural values of travel
destinations.
Ecotourism also benefit countries financially by creating job opportunities for the locals to
promote and maintain the ecosystem of a country. The local communities take advantage of the
economic and social benefits by contributing in the success of ecotourism by spreading
awareness of sustainability and protecting the natural environment.
Activity for Students:
 Implement a green tourism activity (such as plantation of trees)
57| P a g e
SUMMARY
Sustainable tourism is a form of tourism that minimizes the harm and maximizes the benefits of
tourism industry for natural environment and local communities. Whereas, ecotourism protects
and maintain environment through sustainability.
Sustainable tourism plays an important part in preserving cultural heritage sites in Pakistan by
spreading awareness and importance of cultural heritage through local communities.
Ecotourism protects and strengthens natural resources to maintain the growth of tourism industry
while promoting green environment and improving the economy of a country by creating job
opportunities for the local communities.
Key Words
 Sustainability
 Ecotourism
 Heritage
 Economy
 Nature
 Socio-culture
 Preservation
58 | P a g e
EXERCISE
 Gather and present the data at local level of tourist flow and impact on local businesses
and its opportunities
 Draw a regional/national map showing famous cultural and heritage points
 Arrange a visit to nearest heritage site. Set up a camp there keeping in view all the
requirements for camping
Choose the correct answer
1. Sustainability means to:
a. build c. reconstruct
b. maintain and preserve d. store
2. Ecotourism is based on:
a. nature c. resources
b. sustainability d. tourism
3. Preservation means to ____ the existence of something.
a. protect c. develop
b. promote d. damage
4. Ecotourism also help countries by providing:
a. scope c. talent
b. job opportunities d. transportation
5. Hushe Valley is located in:
a. Sindh c. Baltistan
b. Punjab d. Quetta
6. Ecotourism ______ the natural environment.
a. weakens c. damage
b. strengthens d. mix
Write short answers to the following questions.
1. What does sustainability means?
2. What is cultural heritage of Pakistan?
59| P a g e
3. Name any 3 heritage sites in Pakistan.
4. Define nature of ecotourism.
Give detail answers to the following questions.
1. Explain sustainable tourism and its importance.
2. Explain the difference between sustainable tourism and ecotourism.
3. Explain the factors that affect sustainable environment.
4. Describe the role of ecotourism in improving the economy of a country.
60 | P a g e
Chapter 8 Communication Skills
Students Learning Outcomes
After studying this chapter you will be able to:
 know about communication process
 understand types of communication (verbal, non-verbal)
 understand effective communication skills
 identify obstacles in communication
 communicate effectively in a team environment
 know about barrier of communication (cultural barriers, language barriers, gender
barriers)
 know about verbal, non-verbal, visual
61| P a g e
8.1 COMMUNICATION SKILLS
Communication means talking or passing on information to the other person, personally or
through different ways such as telephone, computer or any other medium. Communication skills
are known as the act or process of using words,
actions or behavior while exchanging
information or expressing ideas or feelings to
someone.
There are 7 components of communication
process.
i. Sender
ii. Ideas
iii. Encoding
iv. Communication channel
v. Receiver
vi. Decoding
vii. Feedback
8.1.1 Sender
A person who intends to convey the message with the purpose of passing or exchanging the
information or ideas to the other person is known as sender or communicator.
8.1.2 Ideas
Ideas are the subject matter of communication process, it can be an opinion, attitude, feelings or
suggestions.
8.1.3 Encoding
It means to convert the data or information from one
form to another. Since ideas are intangible, the further
process of encoding requires the use of special symbol
of words, actions or pictures.
8.1.4 Communication Channel
Communication Channel is required when sender have
to decide the medium or channel of sending a message
to another person. The channel of communication can
be either formal or informal.
Activity:
 Pick a friend and
practice with them the
process of
communication
(sender and receiver)
62 | P a g e
8.1.5 Receiver
Receiver is a person on the other hand who is receiving the message or the information. Receiver
of an information need to be an efficient listener. It is the receiver who tries to understand the
message in the best possible manner in order to achieve the desire objective.
8.1.6 Decoding
Decoding is the process of converting the same message body in a way that it bring out its
meaning in order to completely understand the message.
8.1.7 Feedback
Feedback is the last process of communication in which the receiver ensures that themessagehas
been received and understood in the same way it was communicated.
8.2 TYPES OF COMMUNICATION
There are two types of communication.
1. Verbal communication
2. Non-Verbal communication.
63| P a g e
8.2.1 Verbal Communication
Verbal communication happens when a person interacts with another person. It can be face-to-
face discussion, over the telephone, audio and video call platforms. Verbal communication can
also be an informal way of communication for example, chatting with a friend at a coffee shop.
Whereas, formal communication include work meetings and presentations.
8.2.2 Non-Verbal Communication
Non-verbal communication include body language, movement of hands, posture, facial
expressions and the eye contact. This type of communication shows the attitude and personality
of a person.
8.3 Effective Communication Skills
Communication skills requires multiple ways of interacting to someone or conveying messages.
There are 7 effective ways of
communication that are as follows.
1. Completeness
2. Conciseness
3. Consideration
4. Concreteness
5. Clarity
6. Courtesy
7. Correctness
Completeness
In a complete message it is important to make sure that the listener understands the message
completely and is informed to perform a specific task.
Conciseness
It is important to make sure the message is relevant and to the point. Mention important
information and be direct with what action has to be taken.
Activity:
 Practice verbal and non-verbal communication in your class
64 | P a g e
Consideration
Consider important points which needs to be mentioned in the message. An effective
communication must take the audience into consideration. It means to think from the listener’s
perspective.
Concreteness
When communicating the sender needs to make sure that the message is goal-specific and that
the logic of messages fit together. A message should be based on correct facts and opinions.
Clarity
It is important to be clear about the purpose of communication. The recipient should know the
reason behind receiving the message.
Courtesy
Effectiveness of communication can increase by being polite and courteous to the audience. A
message should be honest, professional and with consideration of an audience.
Correctness
It is important to convey the message with factual information and making sure that it’s correct
and up-to-date. If there is any error in information than the audience is likely to get distracted by
the message, which will reduce the effectiveness of the message.
8.4 BARRIERS TO COMMUNICATION
A communication barrier is a problem or difficulty that prevents from conveying the message
correctly and completely. Barriers to communication can occur due to various reasons where the
other person fail to understand the message. There are many different barriers to communication
which can lead to frustration or can misguide the person with inaccurate information.
There are three different forms of communication
barriers.
8.4.1 Cultural barriers
Cultural barriers are challenges a person face when
interacting with someone who belongs to different
culture and beliefs. The way of communication often
65| P a g e
leads to misunderstanding of the message. Sometime it becomes difficult to understand the
beliefs or ideas a person is trying to convey.
8.4.2 Language barriers
Another barrier to communication is the barrier of language. People come from different places
or countries to work at the same place, some are good with their language skills and understand
or speak more than one language but some are not very good with languages. Language is the
most common tool of communication and it plays an important role in helping and building a
bridge of relationship in the work environment. It is the most commonly found barrier in
international business. Suppose, if you have arrived somewhere in another country as a tourist
and you don’t know the language they speak then it automatically becomes difficult for you to
talk or convey to anyone what you are trying to ask or say, but on the other hand if you find
someone in another country who can speak the same language you do, it will be easy for you to
trust them and to communicate with them.
8.4.3 Gender Barriers
Gender barriers are very common barriers especially in professional fields. Gender barriers in
general can be found through women’s side in personal and professional life both. Women’s tend
to focus on the feelings, senses and meaning of the communication or message of the sender.
Some staff may experience hurdles at workplace of not being communicated directly or
thoroughly from the opposite gender.
66 | P a g e
SUMMARY
Communication skills involves the process of conveying a message from one person to another
through a medium, and ensuring that the person receiving the message understand it properly.
For an effective communication it is important to follow the 7 C’s to make sure that the message
stays effective to the audience.
Key Words
 Communication skills
 Decoding
 Conciseness
 Clarity
 Concreteness
 Barriers
 Effectiveness
 Feedback
 Decoding
 Courtesy
 Consideration
EXERCISE
 Pick a few friends and practice types of communication
 Role play on how to receive guests in hospitality sector, use the front desk or a simple
classroom desk and practice
 Prepare a group presentation on the following types of communication barriers:
 Language barriers
 Cultural barriers
 Gender barriers
Choose the correct answer
1. Sender is a person who:
a. sends a message c. receives a message
b. reads a message d. listen to a message
2. There are ___ major elements in communication process.
a. 8 c. 6
b. 7 d. 5
3. Ideas are the ______ of the communication process.
a. information c. process
b. attitude d. subject
67| P a g e
4. Encoding means to _____ the data or information.
a. exchange c. convert
b. remove d. transfer
5. There are ____ C’s of an effective communication.
a. 6 c. 7
b. 8 d. 9
6. Gender barrier means a barrier between:
a. opposite gender c. similar gender
b. barrier in communication d. information
Write short answers to the following questions.
1. Define sender and receiver in a communication process.
2. What is meant by gender barriers?
3. What is the importance of feedback?
4. Define communication skills
5. Enlist 7 C’s of communication
6. Define barriers to communication
7. Define encoding and decoding
Give detail answers to the following questions.
1. Explain communication process.
2. Explain types of communication (verbal and non-verbal).
3. Explain effective communication skills.
68 | P a g e
Chapter 9 Digital Communication and Social Media
Students Learning Outcomes
After studying this chapter you will be able to:
 create, access and manage email account
 learn how to write and respond official email
 role of social media in marketing and business development
 merits and de-merits of social media
69| P a g e
9.1 DIGITAL COMMUNICATION AND SOCIAL MEDIA
A communication that is performed through any digital technology is called digital
communication. It is a simple method of communication with the help of any
digital or social media platform.
9.2 Effective Email Writing
Email means sending a message from a computer or mobile
phone to another person over the internet using web-based
services. It is important to mention the subject in an email so the
recipient knows what it’s about. Mentioning the subject is
important but make sure to keep it concise. Highlight important things and use bullet points if
required. Writing an official email requires use of formal words to make it effective for the
reader.
Following are the steps of setting up an email account:
 Parts of an email address: Username + password (e.g.
abc@gmail/yahoo/outlook.com)
 Username must be unique or your actual name
 @ symbol is unique to email addresses (hold shift key
and press 2) separates the user name from domain
 Domain: .com – others could be .net or .org depending on
the type of work
 Password must be easy to remember but difficult to guess for others
 Avoid using phone number or date of birth as an account password
 It would be best to the combination of numbers and letters
 Alternate email address or phone number will be required in case if you forget your
password so make sure to write it down somewhere safe
 The success of
Communication
Depends On Proper
Understanding of the
Parties Involved
Sign up
Create a Yahoo/Gmail/Outlook address
First name Last name
Email address__________ @domain.com
Password
DO YOU
KNOW?
70 | P a g e
9.3 INTRODUCTION TO SOCIAL MEDIA PLATFORMS
The use of social media is rapidly growing all
around the world each day. It plays an
important role in the development of many
businesses and its growth by giving brand
recognition and success. The tools of social
media helps to advertise products and services
to a large audience anywhere in the world.
Businesses also use social media platforms to
share product information and expand their
business to let potential customers know about it. Social media offer companies to communicate
directly with the target audience and able to sell the products to the right customers at the right
time.
Different social media platforms which are mostly used by the local communities and business
owners are Facebook, Instagram and YouTube. Social media platforms mainly YouTube serves
as an entertainment purpose but people are now earning huge amount of money through it.
Twitter helps in telling the world about the decision a company is making regarding any
economic, social or well-being of the humans and the products. A well-maintained social media
account is key to a successful business. It is not only businesses that does all the efforts but
social media platforms also provides a wide range of benefits for companies through different
tools and strategies.
9.3.1Advantages of Social Media
Social media helps to reach large audience around the world. It allows to post pictures and
videos of the products before selling it, which makes it authentic and easy for the buyers to trust
and purchase the following product. Businesses also use paid campaigns to increase the sale and
awareness of a brand. A person can evaluate the performance of the business and the products
with the help of constant feedback from customers.
Activity:
 Create an account on any social media platform (Facebook/Instagram) and share it in
classroom
71| P a g e
9.3.2 Disadvantages of Social Media
Following are the disadvantages of social media platforms.
 People spend more time on it causing serious addiction and wastage of time
 It causes blur eyesight and headache because of the constant use of mobile phones or
laptop.
 The information on all social media platforms are not always correct
 It decreases face-to-face communication skills
SUMMARY
It is important to mention the subject of an email so that the receiver understands what it’s about.
Focus on highlighting all the important points in a brief manner. If necessary, use bullet points.
To be effective, an official email must be written in formal language.
The power of social media allows businesses to advertise products and services to a global
audience. Paid campaigns are also used by businesses to increase brand awareness and sales.
With the help of constant feedback from customers, a person can evaluate the performance of the
business and the products.
Key Words
 Social Media
 Products
 Evaluate
 Digital communication
 Email
 Business
EXERCISE
 Create an account on any social media platform
 Create email account
 Write an official email to school principal on subject of any importance
 Respond back to an official email received from the principal of your school
 Create a Facebook / Instagram page to promote your business
Choose the correct answer
1. A person receiving an email is called:
a. recipient c. receiver
b. sender d. reader
72 | P a g e
2. Email account password should be:
a. weak c. strong
b. normal d. confusing
3. Avoid using your _______ as your email account password:
a. friend’s name c. phone number
b. internet d. teacher’s help
4. Social media provide different ____ and _____.
a. equipment and accessories c. accessories and tools
b. tools and strategies d. schedule and time
5. Digital communication means to communicate through:
a. technology c. data
b. face-to-face d. messages
6. Disadvantage of social media is that it makes you:
a. addicted c. sleepy
b. active d. sharp
Write short answers to the following questions.
1. What is an email?
2. Name 3 famous social media platforms that are used in today’s world.
3. Define the role of social media in businesses.
4. What are advantages and disadvantages of social media?
5. Define digital communication.
6. What is the importance of mentioning subject in an email?
Give detail answers to the following questions.
1. Explain effective email writing.
2. Describe the importance of social media in today’s world.
3. Write down the steps of creating, accessing and managing email account.
73| P a g e
GLOSSARY
Accommodation A place where people can live, stay or work
Adaptability Ability to adjust and fit in any environment
Adventure tourism A tourist activity that includes physical activity, a cultural exchange
or activities in nature
Airport hotels Hotel that is near to airport. Also called transit hotels
Camping A place where you stay under a tent in natural areas overnight
Characteristics A special quality or trait of a person or thing
Communication skills It involves listening, speaking, observing and empathizing with
another person
Community A group of people living in the same place or having a particular
characteristic in common
Conservation To prevent wasteful use of a resource
Cultural barriers Difference in opinions and thoughts caused by cultural differences
between a sender and receiver
Culture Characteristics and knowledge of a particular group of people or a
community including language, religion, food, music, art etc.
Decoding A process of turning communication into thoughts
Development The process of growth or evolution of something specially people or
a country
Digital communication Any type of communication that relies on the use of technology
Economy The process of which goods and services are produced, bought and
sold in a country
Ecotourism Responsible travel to natural areas that conserves the environment
Employment The state of having a job or going to work
Encoding To convert (body of information or message) from one system of
communication into another
Entrepreneurship The act of starting and running your own business with creativity and
innovation
Evolution A state of evolving or change in characteristics of a person or any
species
F&B Food and Beverage
Flexibility Ability to blend and shape according to the situation
Flooding A rising or overflowing of water specially through heavy rain
Gender barriers Social obstacle that is caused by a particular group of people by
gender bias
Guest houses A kind of a lodging property but in a residential area with average
low price and limited facilities
Heritage Inherited traditions, monuments, objects, and culture
Hiking An outdoor activity which consist of walking in natural environment
74 | P a g e
Hospitality The friendly or generous act of entertaining guests, visitors or
strangers
Hotels A place that has rooms and other facilities/services where people can
stay specially when they are traveling
Inconsistency The state of not being able to able to stay the same way throughout
Inseparability Term used in marketing, describing a key quality of services that
differentiate them from goods.
Intangibility A thing which cannot be seen, touch or feel is known as intangibility
Land sliding Movement of a mass of rocks down the slope
Language barriers The difficulties in communicating by people or groups because of
different languages
Leisure Free time
Lodging A temporary place to stay
Modes of transportation A term used for differentiate between different ways of traveling and
transportation of people or good
Motels A hotel designed for people traveling from motorway, having limited
facilities and services
Museums A non-profit institution open for public, which acquires research and
exhibits the tangible and intangible heritage of humanity
NTCB National Tourism Coordination Board
NTO National Tourist Organization
People-oriented A person who likes to engage with other people personally and
professionally
Perishability Decay or rotten things, products such as vegetables, fruits, bread etc
Preservation The action of protecting and caring specially of a natural environment
Promote To advance or raise
PTDC Pakistan Tourism Development Corporation
Recreation An activity that is done for the purpose of enjoyment
Reinvested To invest time, energy or money again in any case
Resorts A commercial establishment that provide rooms, restaurants, indoor
outdoor games, water pools and other facilities/services in a green
environment
Restaurants An eatery place and a business that prepares and serves food and
beverages
Sustainability Meeting the needs of natural, social and economic resources
Threats An expression of intention to cause harm or injury
Tour brokers A tour broker is a link between a client and a service provider
Tourism People traveling and staying in a place outside the usual environment
for leisure, business or any other purpose
Tourist destination A place for tourists to visit, explore and stay
75| P a g e
Traditions Handing down of information, belief or customs
Transportation Means of carrying people or goods from one place to another
Travel agency An agency that makes the necessary arrangements for a traveler
Travel services Providing services of arranging or booking transportation and
accommodation from one destination to another
Traveling People moving from one place to another for different reasons
Traveling hazards Transport related accidents or injury involving people or vehicles
Trekking The act of making a long journey on tracks
UNESCO It helps in promoting education, science and culture all over the world
UNWTO United Nations World Tourism Organization
WWF An international non-governmental organization that focuses on
maintaining nature
76 | P a g e
About the Author
Abdul Moiz Imran
With a vast experience in different fields of hospitality institutes and tourism industry as a
hotelier and trainer, Mr. Abdul Moiz Imran has been providing services in hospitality institutes
for the last 6 years. He has worked with many International Hotel Chains including Karachi
Marriott Hotel and Ramada Plaza Karachi and has been serving as a Senior Trainer of
Hospitality and Tourism Management in one of the top hospitality institutes in Pakistan. His
Graduation Degree in Hospitality and Tourism Management from one of the pioneer and leading
hospitality institute in Karachi, Pakistan lent him the experience and exposure of teaching and
building the next generation of hoteliers and tourism experts. At such young age, he is passionate
and highly motivated to change the perspective of hospitality and tourism industry of Pakistan in
a more positive way, building and encouraging the youth to take-on the challenge of evolving
and shaping the tourism industry of Pakistan in a much better way in coming years.
National Vocational & Technical Training Commission (NAVTTC)
Plot No.38, Sector H-9/4, Kirthar Road, Islamabad.
Tel: +92-51-9207518
Website: www.navttc.gov.pk