civil society briefs
overvieW of civil society orGANiZAtioNs
Country Context
Pakistan is located in south Asia, bordering the Arabian
sea to the south, Afghanistan and iran to the west, and
india and the People’s republic of china to the east
and north. the country was founded in August 1947
as a result of the bifurcation of india. the capital is
islamabad, but the largest city (and financial capital) is
Karachi.
Pakistan is a federal democratic republic. the bicameral
parliament consists of a senate and a national assembly.
the senate contains 100 seats and its members are
indirectly elected by provincial assemblies to 6-year
terms. the national assembly consists of 342 seats,
60 of which are reserved for women, 10 for minorities.
Assembly members are also elected to 5-year terms. the
prime minister is typically the leader of the party with
the most seats in the national assembly. the president is
chosen by an electoral college composed of the senate,
national assembly, and four provincial assemblies.
Pakistan is the world’s sixth most populous country with
more than 170 million inhabitants, the vast majority
of whom are Muslim. Urdu is the national language
while english is the official language; although Pashtu,
Punjabi, sindhi, and other languages are widely spoken.
two thirds of the population resides in rural areas. the
country is 803,940 square kilometers. Pakistan is a
country of medium human development, ranked 136th
in the United Nations’ Human Development index 2007.
About half the adult population is illiterate, and 7 in 10
persons live on less than $2 per day.1
PAKISTAN History of Civil Society Development
before the british colonial rule, civil society activities
in the area comprising modern-day Pakistan were
motivated primarily by religious beliefs and political
strategy. Hindu concepts, such as daana (giving) and
seva (service) and the islamic practices of zakat (offering
to the poor) and khairat (charity) and haqooq-ul-bad
(human rights), laid the foundation for voluntary
activities. followers of a mystic branch of islam,
the sufis, established khanqahs (monasteries) and
madrasahs (religious schools) in south Punjab and sindh
in the 11th century. in the political arena, the foreign-
origin mughal rulers sought to inculcate loyalty among
the population by undertaking social welfare activities.
Wealthy families, motivated equally by religious and
political ends, also funded charitable activities.2
by the beginning of the 19th century, british rule was
firmly entrenched. foreign missionaries founded schools
and convents in Punjab, sindh, and the North–West
frontier Province (NWfP). these included the Edwardes
Church Mission School of Peshawar (1855), Jesus
and Mary Convent of Sialkot (1858), and the
St. Joseph’s Convent of Karachi. the missions also
established hospitals, dispensaries, orphanages, hostels,
infirmaries, and seminaries.
Domestic religious movements also contributed to social
welfare. several Zoroastrian schools, still considered
among Pakistan’s most prestigious, were established in
Karachi. these included the B.V.S. Parsi School and
the Mama Parsi Girls School. the progressive Hindu

brahmo samaj movement’s social agenda was adopted
by the colonial government, which banned sati (widow
burning) and implemented the Widow remarriage Act
(1856).
During the second half of the 19th century, the colonial
government created a legal framework for civil society
organizations (csos). the societies registration
Act (1860) provided legal status for nongovernment
organizations (NGos). the religious endowment Act
(1863) and the trust Act (1882) regulated trust activity
and shifted management of trusts from government to
trustees. these laws allowed the government to monitor
civil society activities while alleviating its social welfare
burden. the creation of a legal framework, combined
with mass mobilization under the nationalist movement,
sharply increased the number of csos in Pakistan.
one of the most significant civil society movements of
the 20th century was led by Khudai Khidmatgar (servants
of God), a nonviolent Pashtun movement against british
rule. More than 100,000 Pashtuns were involved in the
movement, which also promoted religious harmony and
social reform. Many welfare organizations were also
created under the umbrella of the Khudai Khidmatgar
movement.
immediately following independence, Pakistan csos
helped accommodate the massive migration of
refugees from india. New dispensaries, maternity
homes, infirmaries, and general hospitals were
established, and doctors and paramedical staff
delivered free medical care. the Girl Guides, red cross,
and National Guard worked to reduce poverty and
unemployment.
in the ensuing years, civil society’s focus shifted from
emergency medical care to permanent resettlement
of the refugees. the Family Welfare Cooperative
Housing Society Lahore and the Social Welfare
Society Lahore provided housing. other challenges
included poverty reduction, education, health care,
women’s issues, and population control.
Women played a pivotal role in civil society in the early
years of Pakistan’s independence. in 1948, begum rana
liaqat Ali Khan established the Women’s Volunteer
Service for Refugee Rehabilitation and the All
Pakistan Women’s Association (APWA), which
worked on longer-term issues and continues to operate
today as an umbrella organization. begum rana also
founded the Pakistan Women’s National Guides
and the Pakistan Women’s Naval Reserves in 1949.
begum Jehan Ara shahnawaz established the United
Front for Women’s Rights and the Pakistan Family
Planning Association in 1953.
the government was generally supportive of civil society,
particularly of service-delivery NGos. the National
council of social Welfare was established in 1958 to
fund organizations; coordinate welfare responsibilities
among government departments; and promote NGos
working in remote, deprived areas. the National council
of social Welfare later became an advisory body and its
mandate was assumed by the Directorate General of
social Welfare.
support was also extended through a grant program
administered by the West Pakistan council for social
Work, supporting organizations such as the West
Pakistan Society for the Welfare of the Crippled,
Recreation Association for West Pakistan, and
Children’s Home. A number of graduate associations
were formed during the 1960s, including the
Sindh Graduate Association, which focused on
empowerment and awareness building.
However, the voluntary social Welfare Agencies
registration and control ordinance (1961) made
registration mandatory for social welfare agencies and
a system of closely controlled local governments was
established under the banner “basic Democracy.” the
United Front for Women’s Rights, the first NGo
advocating women’s rights exclusively, was banned
under martial law.
Zulfikar Ali bhutto, who served as President from
1971–1973 and as prime minister from 1973–1977,
nationalized schools and colleges run by voluntary
organizations. During the same period, however,
the number of labor unions grew. several women’s
organizations were founded, such as Shirkatgah
(1975), Pakistan Women’s Lawyers Association
(1980), and the Women’s Action Forum (1981). New
service-delivery organizations, such as SOS Children’s
Village and the Adult Basic Education Society, were
also established.
csos have continued to flourish in Pakistan over the
last three decades. During the late 1970s, over 200
csos were established in the NWfP and balochistan
to help settle the 3.5 million refugees fleeing civil war
in Afghanistan. some of the most prominent Pakistan
csos were founded during the 1980s, including the
Aga Khan Rural Support Programme (AKRSP) and
the Orangi Pilot Project. this decade also witnessed
an increase in funding from the government and
international development partners, and the emergence
of cso coalitions.
throughout the 1990s, the government established
semiautonomous grant-making foundations, such as
the Sindh Education Foundation and the Pakistan

Poverty Alleviation Fund. in 1990, the United states
Agency for international Development (UsAiD) provided
an endowment fund to create the Trust for Voluntary
Organizations.
in 1992, the government launched the Social Action
Program to improve social service delivery. The Social
Action Program provided substantial project funding
for csos. several government-initiated rural support
programs modeled upon AKrsP were also established,
including the Sarhad Rural Support Programme in
the NWfP, the Punjab Rural Support Programme,
and the Balochistan Rural Support Programme.
Civil Society Today
Pakistan’s civil society is characterized by hybrid forms,
multiple inheritances, and the unresolved struggle
between the practices and values of pre-capitalist
society and new modes of social life, between
authoritarian legacies, and democratic aspirations.
While some social forms such as councils of elders,
neighborhood associations, and shrines continue from
previous phases of society, many new groups have been
created through the development of capitalism. such
are the dynamics of an evolving civil society, caught
between the throes of a dying social order and the birth
pangs of a new one.3
there are an estimated 45,000 active nonprofit
organizations in Pakistan,4 with more than 6 million
members and a quarter million staff members. the
sector engages in a diverse set of activities, ranging
from religious education to sports activities, from
performing religious rites to lobbying for civic amenities,
and from running neighborhood vocational centers to
national human rights advocacy organizations. sizes
also range from small informal neighborhood graveyard
management committees to multibillion rupee
hospitals.5
According to a survey, nearly half (46%) of Pakistan’s
nonprofit organizations cite education as their main
activity. the second largest component in the nonprofit
sector consists of organizations engaged in advocacy
(18%). organizations providing social services represent
8% of the total, while about 5% of organizations report
religious activities as their main service. A relatively small
share work in the health sector (6%).6
the number of labor unions—not included in the
figure above—is estimated at 8,000, with a
total membership of about 1 million. Workers’
representatives have attributed these relatively small
numbers to the restrictive nature of labor legislation,
which debars broad categories of employees from
forming unions.7
Many international nongovernment organizations
are active in Pakistan, including Oxfam, Save the
Children, Asia Foundation, British Council,
ActionAid, CARE, Muslim Aid, and World Vision.
Legislation Concerning Activities of
Nonprofit Organizations
to secure legal status as a nonprofit organization, an
entity has to be registered under one of several laws.
Most nonprofit organizations are registered under
four laws: the societies registration Act, 1860; the
trust Act, 1882; the voluntary social Welfare Agencies
(registration and control) ordinance, 1961; and
the companies ordinance, 1984. these are briefly
summarized below.8
the legal framework for nonprofit organizations
contains laws that either require registration or
confer registration by virtue of the organization’s very
creation, or that grant tax concessions or exemptions.
Any organization that wishes to gain access to
the funds available from provincial social welfare
departments must register under the voluntary social
Welfare Agencies (registration and control) ordinance,
1961.
other than the companies ordinance, 1984, the
aforementioned laws are implemented by the provinces,
which can alter rules to suit their own purposes. for
instance, the government of the NWfP decided that it
will no longer register organizations engaged in social
welfare under the societies registration Act but register
them only under the voluntary social Welfare Agencies
(registration and control) ordinance, 1961. in the case
of Karachi, registering under the societies registration
Act is mandatory for schools to be recognized by
directorates of education.
the four laws under which most nonprofit organizations
must register are
Societies Registration Act, 1860. societies may
be established for the promotion of literature,
science, or the fine arts; the diffusion of useful
knowledge, political education; or charitable
purposes and funds.
The Trust Act, 188. A trust is an obligation
annexed to the ownership of property. it is a gift
of property to a person or institution that benefits
both parties. three entities are needed to create a
trust: a creator or author of the trust; a person in



whom the confidence is placed (i.e., the trustee);
and a person for whose benefit the trust is created
(i.e., the beneficiary). A trust, which can be revoked,
may be created for any lawful purpose. the trust
Act provides legal protection for private acts of
public charity and allows the creators of the trust
tremendous flexibility in their operations. there
are two types of trusts: public charitable trusts and
private trusts. A private trust can be established for
the benefit of an individual or a group of persons.
A public charitable trust, unlike a private trust,
benefits all or certain sections of society.
Voluntary Social Welfare Agencies
(Registration and Control) Ordinance, 1961.
this ordinance was based on a concept of social
welfare that recognizes the “poor and destitute”
of society who need institutional, rather than
merely charitable, support. the ordinance requires
that all organizations engaged in social welfare
or charitable works be registered with the social
welfare departments of the provincial governments.
the ordinance states that a voluntary social
welfare agency is an organization or undertaking
established by people, of their own free will, to
solely provide welfare services in any one of various
specific fields.
Companies Ordinance (Section ), 198. Any
association formed to further the development
of commerce, art, science, religion, sports, social
services, charity, or any other “useful” objective
may be registered as a nonprofit company, with
limited liability, under section 42 of the companies
ordinance of 1984. it must direct, or intend to
direct, its profits, if any, or any other form of
income, in advancing its objectives; and prohibit
the payment of any returns to its members. in
most cases, registered nonprofit companies are
organizations engaged in research with donor
funding, clubs, and very large organizations
engaged in delivering social and welfare services.
Government Perceptions of the
Nonprofit Sector
Government policy on csos has been evolving through
the years. there have been periods when the policy has
been broadly supportive of the civil society sector. this is
evidenced by increasing reference in recent 5-year plan
documents, which have emphasized the role of csos.
other supportive acts have included the granting of
special fiscal incentives for philanthropic contributions
by corporate entities or individuals to nonprofit
organizations, and the explicit recognition given to the
role of nonprofit organizations in major programs of
social development like the social Action Program and
the family Planning Program.9


While authorities are supportive at the policy level and
are providing much increased financing support to csos
through apex institutions such as the Pakistan Poverty
Alleviation fund, local authorities tend to be less so at
the operational level where csos are sometimes seen as
competitors for funds and influence. further, officials are
generally supportive of the welfare and service-providing
role of the nonprofit sector as compared to nonprofit
organizations in social and political advocacy.
the posture has also tended to vary among different
parts of government. by and large, politicians from
the ruling parties have generally been neutral in their
attitude toward nonprofit organizations. bureaucracies,
especially in the finance and planning ministries, have
been mostly supportive because of the realization that
in the presence of severe fiscal constraints, an enhanced
role of nonprofit organizations in service delivery saves
money for the government. line ministries prefer to
use nonprofit organizations only when there is a well-
defined gap in capacity or resources.
there appears to be another major dichotomy in the
government’s posture depending on the nature of the
cso. the government tends to support “indigenous”
csos, which mobilize resources locally and frequently
operate at the grassroots level to mobilize communities
and prepare them for organizing the provision of local
services. this is so because the government recognizes
its limitations, especially in reaching pockets of poverty
in far-flung backward areas—leaving this task to local
nonprofit organizations. it is also predicated on the
need to promote self-help by communities so that the
burden on government is minimized.
on the other hand, foreign-funded csos, whose
operations remain to a certain extent outside the
regulatory control of authorities, are sometimes viewed
less positively. this perception exists because of these
groups’ financial and functional autonomy, and because
many of them have taken up sensitive causes like human
and women’s rights, environment, and other issues.
in general, there seems to be no explicit comprehensive
or cohesive policy that has been articulated with respect
to the civil society sector. this is also the consequence of
the absence of an institutional mechanism to coordinate
the role of different registration authorities.
Civil Society Organizations’ Capacity
and Challenges
Pakistan’s organized civil society sector has grown
exponentially in terms of size and influence. Questions
remain whether this growth can be sustained given the
major fault lines in the sector that are bound to inhibit

its development. there are a number of serious issues—
state security concerns, poor financial transparency,
development partner dependency, management
capacity, and internal governance—that afflict the
sector and will continue to hamper its efforts to serve
as an effective partner of the state in the delivery of
services, and as an effective counterpoise of the state in
checking its excesses.10
systems of compliance must be vastly improved, as
organizations fail to file obligatory reports with the
government. Provisions of law that require public
disclosure are being ignored, depriving society of
the most important means of holding organizations
accountable. the widespread perception of misuse of
charitable funds, especially foreign funds, needs to be
addressed. Most large development and rights advocacy
organizations are development partner dependent and
csos are still in the process of gaining their credibility
with the public at large.
the increased size and public profile of citizen
organizations has also inevitably led to increased
scrutiny and criticism. the legitimacy of the agenda of
csos has been questioned. Many citizens, including
some senior policy makers, say that rights organizations
(particularly labor and women’s rights organizations)
push an agenda that is alien to the culture and
economic needs of the country. some take the rather
extreme view that the partnership of some rights
organizations with international development partners
harms the ideology and the integrity of the country.
the agendas of militant-based organizations have raised
serious security concerns. they have come under rising
criticism by the government because of the cross-border
agenda pursued by some of the more important groups.
the capacity of csos is weak. Aside from the Pakistan
NGO Forum (PNF) and sectarian-based networks
within religious organizations, the civil society sector is
largely amorphous.
there is no communication between the large and
politically influential wing of civil society that draws its
strength from religion, and the small but increasingly
vocal left wing that draws its strength from modern
development theories and the rights movement.
Numerous philanthropic and charitable organizations
that straddle this divide do not as yet see themselves as
part of a larger civil society and mostly remain outside
of organizational activities. improved communication
within the sector could help change the damaging
negative public perceptions of csos. Greater efforts
to differentiate the effective and transparent from the
ineffective and opaque would also aid efforts to improve
public opinion.
the best means for institutionalized improvement is full
disclosure within the sector. this is arguably the weakest
aspect of the nonprofit governance and regulatory
system. Many organizations maintain websites but do
not post governance and financial management details.
only a few organizations have put their financial records
on the internet.
organizational capacities also need to be improved.
basic deficiencies in Pakistan’s education system
and lack of economic mobility mean that the vast
majority of citizens’ organizations have limited access
to people who can be trained to run more effective
organizations.
one positive development in terms of
professionalization was the adoption of a code
of conduct by the PNf, which comprises some
2,500 organizations. this was done “to demonstrate
that NGos/community-based organizations (cbos)
not only teach others about principles of sharing,
partnership, transparency, and accountability but also
apply them to their organizational and programmatic
domains.”11
Funding of Civil Society Organizations
the widespread public impression that csos in the
country are heavily dependent on foreign funds may
hold true for large development-oriented and advocacy
organizations, but not all others. While intermediary
NGos have multiple funding sources, cbos rely
mostly on local sources. civil society at large relies on
indigenous funding, both private and public.12
About half of the estimated cash revenue of csos
comes from fees and charges, including the proceeds
of sales and membership fees. More than one third of
cash revenue comes from indigenous sources, primarily
individual giving. foreign cash contributions from
foundations, trusts, development partners, corporations,
and individuals represent less than 7% of the total.
Private indigenous philanthropy is an important provider
of noncash revenue (in-kind contributions). Public sector
payments to csos are relatively insignificant as a share
of their cash and in-kind revenues (less than 6% in both
cases).13
the Pakistan Centre for Philanthropy (PCP) was
established in 2001 to lead philanthropy promotion
in Pakistan. it seeks to mobilize resources from the
private sector to supplement the government’s poverty
reduction agenda. PcP facilitates the philanthropic
efforts of others by engaging in action research, policy
and legislative reviews, and strategies to promote
meaningful collaboration among stakeholders in the
6
philanthropic arena. PcP certification serves as the basis
for nonprofit organizations to claim tax benefits from
the central board of revenue.14
Umbrella Coalitions and Networks
following are some of the country’s leading cso
coalitions and networks.
Pakistan NGO Forum
founded in the mid-1990s, the PNf’s mission is to
create an enabling environment for csos working to
foster a democratic, just, and liberal society. it consists
of five networks of NGos from all parts of the country:
Balochistan NGOs Federation, Sindh NGOs
Federation, Surhad NGOs Ittehad, Punjab NGOs
Coordination Council, and Coalition of Rawalpindi/
Islamabad NGOs. including all the members of these
provincial bodies, the PNf represents over 2,500 NGos.
All Pakistan Women’s Association
All Pakistan Women’s Association is a nonprofit,
nonpolitical organization whose fundamental aim is
to further the moral, social, and economic welfare of
women and children of Pakistan. since its foundation,
the All Pakistan Women’s Association has been a
very active organization, with branches in 56 districts as
well as fringe urban and rural branches across Pakistan.
it relies on development partners, entrepreneurs, and
philanthropists to fund its work.
Rural Support Program Network
the rural support Program (rsP) Network is a network
of 10 rural support programs (rsPs) of Pakistan.
collectively, the rsPs form the largest nongovernment,
rural development agencies in the country. the goal of
the rsP Network is to assist the rsPs in reducing poverty
and improving sustainable livelihoods of the poor in
Pakistan.
Pakistan Reproductive Health Network
the Pakistan reproductive Health Network was initiated
by a group of health activists in 1995 to bring together
issues related to gender, sexuality, and reproductive
health for a more integrated approach to women’s
health. the network has 260 members, of which
130 are organizations. the network works in building
the capacity of its members and in reproductive health-
related advocacy. Network members include NGos,
cbos, government departments and officials, women’s
groups and individuals, and specialists and consultants
with an interest in reproductive health issues.
Pakistan Microfinance Network
the Pakistan Microfinance Network is a network of
organizations engaged in microfinance and dedicated
to improving the outreach and sustainability of
microfinance services in Pakistan. the original founding
members included seven retail microfinance institutions,
two donor agencies, and an NGo support organization.
the network currently consists of 13 organizations.
CSO Databases
Net-NGO.com
Net-NGo.com maintains a website allowing NGos to
directly create and post a profile, which is entered into
a searchable public database that contains thousands of
listings (www.net-ngo.com/).
Pakistan Centre for Philanthropy
the Pakistan centre for Philanthropy maintains an
online list of more than 135 nonprofit organizations
that it has certified on standard parameters of
internal governance, program delivery, and financial
management. the certification system is the first
of its kind in south Asia, recognizing organizations
that exhibit exemplary standards in organizational
effectiveness (www.pcp.org.pk/resources.html#NPo
Profiles).
ProPoor
ProPoor is an NGo in india that maintains a database
of 13,000 organizations across south Asia, including
Pakistan. NGos can be searched by name, region, or
area of focus. in addition, the site hosts sections on
developmental news, appeals by NGos, project reports,
and stories of service (www.propoor.org).
Sustainable Development Policy Institute
sustainable Development Policy institute is a research
institute that aims to provide quality policy research
and advocate democratic governance and pro-people
initiatives. it maintains an online list of NGos working
for women and promoting human rights (www.sdpi.
org/know_your_rights/ngo.htm).
Cooperation between ADB and Civil
Society Organizations in Pakistan
the Asian Development bank (ADb) recognizes csos
as significant players in the development process
and cooperates with them to improve the impact,

sustainability, and quality of its services. csos support
sustainable development through
innovation—identifying new approaches and
models for specific development activities and
drawing upon their close knowledge of local
communities;
accountability—helping ensure that project
components are implemented as envisaged and
planned;
responsiveness—encouraging the implementation
of projects to respond to local needs;
participation—serving as bridges between project
authorities and affected communities, and
providing structures for citizen participation; and
sustainability—nurturing continuity in project





work, especially when implementing agencies lack
capacity or when staffing changes.
ADb’s Pakistan resident Mission acts as a focal point forresident Mission acts as a focal point foracts as a focal point for
relations with csos in the country.
Civil Society Involvement in ADB-Financed
Activities
csos have taken part in several ADb-financed activities
in Pakistan. the following tables provide examples of
such ADb–cso cooperation in the context of loans,
technical assistance, and Japan Fund for Poverty
Reduction–funded projects.
Civil Society Organization Involvement in ADB-Financed Loan Projects
Project Title Project Objective and Nongovernment Organization/Civil Society
Organization Involvement
00
sindh rural Development
($50 million)
Approved: 20 Nov 2002
the project was designed to improve governance and expand access of poor
rural residents to public services. the project has featured a partnership
between government, nongovernment organizations (NGos), community-based
organizations (cbos), and beneficiaries in prioritization and delivery of project
activities.
local civil society organizations (csos) were contracted for community development
activities, agriculture and household technology dissemination, awareness-raising
campaigns, and instituting simple accounting systems.
rural finance sector Development Program
($225 million)
Approved: 20 Dec 2002
the project was designed to develop a sustainable rural finance system for the
majority of poor households to have permanent access to institutional financial
services at minimal transaction cost. csos have helped implement the social
intermediation process in coordination with microfinance institutions using the
resources of the Microfinance social Development fund under the Microfinance
sector Development Program. National csos have acted as semiformal sources of
rural finance.
Decentralization support Program
($270 million)
Approved: 21 Nov 2002
the program’s objective is to create an enabling environment for improved
public access to equitably delivered and sustainable services by improving local
government representation, accountability, and efficiency through fiscal support
for reforms in policy, legal, technical, and fiscal domains. the project made
arrangements for participation of csos on the national and provincial steering
committees.
Decentralized elementary education (sindh)
($75 million)
Approved: 19 sep 2002
the project aimed to raise the quality of elementary education through provision
of stipends, scholarships, free textbooks, teacher training, and incentives to enable
students to benefit from quality education.
cso expertise has been used to employ new programs in pre-primary education, life
skills, madrasah curriculum training, and school development funds for improved
student attendance and teacher performance.
Punjab community Water supply and sanitation sector
($50 million)
Approved: 28 Nov 2002
the project intends to improve the living conditions and quality of life of the
communities in rural settlements in Punjab Province where water is scarce and
groundwater is brackish.
subprojects have been implemented by local csos, and cbos were formed to
enhance community participation.
8
Project Title Project Objective and Nongovernment Organization/Civil Society
Organization Involvement
Punjab road Development sector
($150 million)
Approved: 31 oct 2002
the project’s objectives include increasing access for rural populations to markets
and social services by improving and rehabilitating the province’s rural access road
network. csos were consulted and have been part of the road safety commission.
00
southern Punjab basic Urban services Project
($90 million)
Approved: 18 Dec 2003
the project was designed to improve living conditions and quality of life of
low-income communities in 21 towns by upgrading water supply and sanitation
facilities, solid waste management, and the road network. csos have implemented
the community development and participation component.
sindh Devolved social services Program
($210 million)
Approved: 12 Dec 2003
the goal of the project is to improve people’s education, health, and access to
water and sanitation. csos were contracted to improve social services including
technical assistance (tA)–supported capacity building of cbos.
Punjab resource Management Program
($200 million)
Approved: 4 Dec 2003
the program aims to improve the socioeconomic indicators in Punjab through
efficient and sustainable delivery of public services that are responsive to the dynamic
needs of Punjab’s society.
csos contributed to reform processes in governance structures, systems, and
procedures. outreach training was conducted for district social service managers and
csos.
balochistan road Development sector Project
($185.7 million)
Approved: 20 Nov 2003
the objectives of the project are to enhance access of rural populations to economic
opportunities and social services by improving the province’s road network,
improve trade facilitation and efficiency of the priority road transport corridor, and
provide essential institutional support and capacity building to the government.
csos were consulted on selecting the provincial roads to be rehabilitated. A cso
will be engaged to help administer and coordinate the project, including poverty
monitoring.
community Development and Poverty reduction
Project
($1 million)
Approved: 20 Nov 2003
the tA loan aims to enhance the poverty impact of the balochistan road
Development sector Project to ensure that maximum possible development benefits
reach the people living along the project roads and that the resources upon
which they rely are protected and developed in a sustainable way. the loan was
implemented by csos.
00
Multisector rehabilitation and improvement Project
for Azad, Jammu, and Kashmir
($57 million)
Approved: 21 Dec 2004
the project aims to improve living conditions, quality of life, and economic prospects in
Azad, Jammu, and Kashmir by rehabilitating and reconstructing essential physical and
social infrastructure damaged by decades of neglect.
interviews and focus group discussions were conducted with various stakeholders
including csos. cso services would be drawn upon to build capacity of school
management committees.
sustainable livelihoods in barani Areas
($41 million)
Approved: 14 Dec 2004
the project’s objectives are to improve access to land, water, markets, services,
agriculture inputs, technologies, and employment for the population of barani
(dryland areas not served by canal irrigation) to increase incomes, improve the
quality of life, and ultimately reduce poverty among vulnerable groups within the
project area; and strengthen governance structures, aid the process of devolution,
and build capacity within local governments to plan and implement development
activities.
csos have conducted literacy skills–based training, and a cso has provided
technical inputs at the union level and assisted with implementation of the village
union and the project’s development component.
balochistan resource Management Program
($110 million)
Approved: 25 Nov 2004
the program supports efforts of the government of balochistan to improve
governance and public sector resource management. csos have been engaged
in service delivery. Program formulation has been coordinated with various
stakeholders from all levels of government, the private sector, csos, and
development partners.
9
Project Title Project Objective and Nongovernment Organization/Civil Society
Organization Involvement
supporting Public resource Management reforms in
balochistan—tA loan
($3 million)
Approved: 25 Nov 2004
the objectives of the tA loan include supporting assessments and analytical
studies in key policy and reform areas addressed under the balochistan resource
Management Program, developing strategies to improve fiscal sustainability
and public service delivery, assessing current data availability, and developing a
consultation and communications strategy to engage stakeholders and disseminate
information on the reform program.
csos have been engaged in service delivery. Program formulation was coordinated
with various stakeholders from all levels of government, the private sector, csos,
and development partners.
Punjab Devolved social services Program
($150 million)
Approved: 20 Dec 2004
the program objective is to strengthen devolved social services for a more equitable,
efficient, effective, and sustainable delivery of social services in line with the Punjab
local Government ordinance 2001.
csos had been part of the provincial steering committee that would monitor
the program. Guidelines were prepared to allow csos to seek proposals for
partnerships with public sector institutions to offer alternative forms of service
delivery.
restructuring of the technical education and
vocational training system Project (North–West
frontier Province)
($11 million)
Approved: 14 Dec 2004
the project aims to help reduce poverty in the North–West frontier Province (NWfP)
by enhancing competitiveness of technical education and vocational training (tevt)
and the employability of graduates in line with market needs. csos have engaged
teachers from technical education and vocational training institutions, and trained
students on a profit-sharing basis.
restructuring of the technical education and
vocational training system and Project
(balochistan Province)
($16 million)
Approved: 14 Dec 2004
the project aims to help the government of balochistan reduce poverty by
enhancing competitiveness of tevt and the employability of graduates in line with
market needs. the project supports engagement of csos to provide services to out-
of-school youth, women, and rural poor.
North–West frontier Province (NWfP) road
Development sector and subregional connectivity
($301.2 million)
Approved: 18 Nov 2004
the objectives of the project are to increase access of the rural population in the
NWfP to social services and markets leading to improved livelihood and poverty
reduction, enhance efficiency of the road network and transport in the province,
and improve subregional cooperation and trade by facilitating road transport to
Afghanistan and the central Asian republics. the project has worked with csos to
encourage community participation.
00
rawalpindi environmental improvement
($60 million)
Approved: 13 Dec 2005
the project intends to improve the water supply and sanitation facilities, solid
waste management, wastewater treatment, and slaughterhouse; and ensure
sustainable urban investments by strengthening institutional capacities of the rawal
town and rawalpindi Water and sanitation Authority, promoting policy reforms
focused on greater devolution of authority and involving all stakeholders in service
delivery. csos, among others, attended the consultative workshops during project
preparation. they had been involved in project identification and design from an
early stage.
balochistan Devolved social services
($195 million)
Approved: 8 Dec 2005
the project’s objectives are to improve access to affordable, efficient, effective, and
quality education, health, water supply, and sanitation in the public and private
sectors; decrease income-, gender-, ethnic-, and geography-based inequities
in social services; and strengthen local governments, the private sector, and
communities to improve social service delivery.
csos were contracted to support the bureau of statistics in carrying out
quantitative service delivery surveys, support the finance department in carrying
out public expenditure–tracking surveys, and conduct third-party validation of the
process.
10
Project Title Project Objective and Nongovernment Organization/Civil Society
Organization Involvement
006
rural enterprise Modernization Project
($5 million)
Approved: 7 feb 2006
the project aims to create and diversify job and income-earning opportunities in
the rural areas especially for the landless, wage earners, and women. the project
will collaborate with csos to enhance the leverage for policy advocacy on behalf
of poor persons. csos will be engaged individually to provide inputs into market
surveys and organize small entrepreneurs and training workshops.
federally Administered tribal Areas rural Development
Project
($42 million)
Approved: 25 Apr 2006
the program intends to improve the productivity of selected micro watersheds and
their associated natural resource base. csos will provide assistance in community
organization and participation activities in implementing the resettlement plans.
they will also be involved in information disclosure and conflict resolution, especially
in matters related to entitlements and compensation payments to affected people.
subproject 1: lower bari Doab canal improvement
Project and the Punjab irrigated Agriculture Project
Preparation facility
($227.8 million)
Approved: 18 Dec 2006
the project will promote economic growth, increase farm incomes, and improve
resource sustainability through enhanced productivity of irrigated agriculture and
improved management of Punjab’s water resources, including rehabilitation and
upgrading of the lower bari Daub canal and its distributaries and minor canals that
make up the lower bari Daub canal distribution system.
extensive public consultations were held with various stakeholders including csos
during project preparation. csos are anticipated to play a role in carrying out the
project resettlement activities—their preparation, implementation, and monitoring
and evaluation. csos will also be consulted on the project as a whole throughout
its preparation and implementation.
00
sindh coastal community Development Project
($36.0 million)
Approved: 15 Jan 2007
the project focus includes job creation, community-driven development, and
methods for households to cope with environmental degradation in parts of the
thatta and badin districts. community-led civil works and related initiatives, as
well as direct beneficiary participation in the sustainable management of coastal
natural resources, will support social capital development and better public service
access. this will establish the enabling conditions for continuing community-driven
development. A national NGo, the National Rural Support Programme, is
involved in community development activities. together with the International
Union of Conservation of Nature and the government, the National rural
support Programme is campaigning to promote the multiple benefits of mangroves
and organizing community training programs on sustainable management and
mangrove planting and tending techniques.
11
Nongovernment Organization Involvement in ADB-Financed Technical Assistance
Project Title Project Objective and Nongovernment Organization/Civil Society
Organization Involvement
Regional Technical Assistance (RETA) 889: Gender and Development Initiatives
Approved Dec 1999
cure and Awareness regarding Prevention and care of
burn victims
($15,000)
the project objective is to prevent the occurrence of burn cases among women andproject objective is to prevent the occurrence of burn cases among women andobjective is to prevent the occurrence of burn cases among women and
children through promoting awareness on prevention, care, and cure of burn cases;
and making burn care centers sustainable.
the laboratory and curative facilities at the burn care centre established by the
Watan Welfare Society of Pakistan were upgraded. this has improved the
treatment and recovery rates of burn victims. A seminar conducted by the cso was
successful and attended by 400 participants. it raised awareness on the need to
fund and promote specialist burn care.
National Women’s studies conference: the
transdisciplinary Women’s studies conference
($11,000)
the objectives of the conference are to encourage Pakistan women to write;
increase the resource pool of women for the institute of Women’s studies and for
Pakistan, at large; and establish a network between Pakistanwomen academics and
other women working in the area of women’s studies.
the conference, organized by ASR/Institute of Women’s Studies Lahore,
attracted high-level media attention. the institute published papers presented
at the conference, thereby promoting women’s studies and reinforcing dialogue
among women working in diverse fields.
training Workshops with self-help Groups and
Grassroots Practitioners
($7,000)
the objective of the project is to bring together craft workers for them to share
knowledge, create networks, and access markets.
Hawwa Women Craft Cooperative was able to strengthen regional and
national links among female artisans through a series of training workshops that
covered topics such as female entrepreneurs, selection of materials, design, quality
control, basics of finished products, pricing, billing, budgeting, credit and savings,
marketing, and women’s legal and social rights.
Proposal on Advocacy for Girls education
($10,000)
specific objectives of the project are to facilitate an enabling environment for
girls’ education, strengthen education networks, stimulate social pressure to bring
about positive change in education policy, develop a database of organizations and
institutions working on education for girls, and promote girls’ education through
the media. Khwendo Kor Women and Children Development Program
acted as convenor of the provincial-level education core Group that comprises
representatives from NGos, cbos, and government departments.
Nursery Plant Project
($13,000)
the aim of the project is to set up a model nursery to demonstrate that income can
be generated with the local resources in an environmentally sustainable manner.
if successful, the project will enhance income levels of local women.
Shirkat Gah has collaborated with the community-based women’s group Swani
Sanjh and established an ornamental plant commercial nursery. the women
developed an income-generating activity through their involvement in the plant
nursery, acquired new technical and business skills, and gained confidence in their
ability to manage and operate a nursery.
1
Project Title Project Objective and Nongovernment Organization/Civil Society
Organization Involvement
Regional Technical Assistance (RETA) 6109: NGO Partnerships for Poverty Reduction
Approved May 00
information Materials on PakistanWomen’s
constitutional and legal rights
($20,000)
the purpose of the project is to print and distribute 30,000 copies of educational
and information material related to all the constitutional and legal guarantees for
women to ensure their economic and social rights.
The Women and Development Association published Women and Law with
Reforms of 2001–2002 in Urdu (20,000 copies) and sindhi (10,000 copies).
the material was disseminated in Hyderabad, islamabad, Karachi, lahore,
Kawalpind, and Peshawar to csos, members of the judiciary, lawyers, journalists,
women police and police stations, members of local government, and students.
standards Development for Women’s shelters
in Pakistan
($20,000)
the project will support activities to strengthen networks and develop standards
for providing protection and related services for women in distress, particularly
survivors of violence and those at risk.
Dastak Charitable Trust conducted six training workshops for managers and staff
of government and nongovernment shelters in running and managing shelters, and
shared good practices for responding to the needs of the client population. two
consultations were also conducted to develop guidelines for the establishment and
management of shelters. A newly developed Dastak manual lists shelter experiences
to assist in decision making.
legal Aid clinics in Peshawar
($20,000)
the objective of the project is to establish legal clinics to provide legal aid to
vulnerable groups in Peshawar. the clinic will also help law students develop
practical skills related to the legal profession in Pakistan.
the Aurat Foundation set up a model legal clinic in collaboration with the
University of Peshawar and the bar council of Peshawar. the university provided
the students legal expertise, while Aurat foundation provided the community
experience, connections, and outreach. Project activities included, among others,
lectures on court structure; case dissection; exposure visits to police stations,
forensic laboratories, and prisons; and student involvement in mock trials and
hearings.
enhanced internal Management of family Planning
Association of Pakistan
($20,000)
the project will institutionalize within the Family Planning Association of
Pakistan (FPAP) a system for continuous self-assessment for improved service
delivery to its target communities and partners. the institutional audit will strengthen
fPAP’s capacity to address issues identified in the strategic plan and the accreditation
review.
fPAP created an institutional review team and hired an independent consultant
to review its organizational structure and institutional management system,
and conduct a capacity analysis. the results of the review were presented to
management and stakeholders. the final report, Review of FPAP Organizational
Structure and Management to Enhance Good Governance, satisfactorily met the
project’s goal.
1
Project Title Project Objective and Nongovernment Organization/Civil Society
Organization Involvement
Country Technical Assistance (TA)
sindh basic Urban services
($795,000)
Approved: 23 Dec 2004
the project aims to facilitate sustainable urban development for low-income
communities in sindh. it will help the government prepare to improve basic
urban infrastructure and services in selected urban centers in sindh. the project’s
consultant team consulted extensively with national and local csos on design and
implementation issues.
Preparation of National Agriculture strategy
($350,000)
Approved: 9 Dec 2005
this project intends to help the government review developments in agriculture and
prepare a medium-term national agriculture strategy with clear priorities for public
investments in agriculture development. csos are members of the project steering
committee.
improving Access to financial services
($2 million)
Approved: 14 Dec 2006
this tA project will support sector developments for improved access to financial
services and implementation of key measures under the program. A credit
information bureau may be created for all types of institutions, including csos,
to support improved access to financial services and lower cost service through
improved information systems, reporting, and transparency.
Civil Society Organization Involvement in
Projects Financed by the Japan Fund for
Poverty Reduction
the Japan fund for Poverty reduction (JfPr) is an
untied grant facility established by the Government
of Japan and ADb in May 2000. from an initial
contribution of $90 million, the fund now stands at
well over $360 million, of which $224 million has been
committed. JfPr assists ADb clients provide direct relief
to the poorest and most vulnerable segments of society
while building up their capacities for self-help and
income generation.
JfPr is a tool for local communities and csos to actively
participate in the development process. in particular, it
initiates and supports innovative programs that have
high potential for improving the affected countries’
situations; provides relatively rapid, demonstrable
benefits through initiatives that have positive prospects
of developing into sustainable activities over the long
term; and assists programs designed and implemented
by local populations and civil society.
1
Examples of Projects Involving Nongovernment Organizations in Pakistan Financed by Japan Fund
for Poverty Reduction
Project Title Project Objective and Nongovernment Organization/Civil Society
Organization Involvement
Mobilizing the Poor for better Access to Health
($3.4 million)
Approved: 6 May 2003
the project will enhance access of poor people, particularly women, to health
services through bottom-up referral systems for the poor, and improve the
nutritional status of marginalized women and children.
this pilot project will be used as a model for designing future projects involving
community-based strategies to improve the health and nutrition status of poor
women and children, which will contribute to poverty reduction.
Project facilitation and implementation will be managed and coordinated by an
international nongovernment organization. National NGos will implement project
components in selected districts.
enhancing road improvement benefits to Poor
communities in North–West frontier Province (NWfP)
($1 million)
Approved: 10 feb 2005
the purpose of the project is to pilot test a mechanism for linking poverty
reduction initiatives to road network improvement so that the poor can improve
their livelihoods. csos will help communities form self-help groups to develop
a situation analysis and prepare a list of priorities that will link their community
with road development. A local cso will be engaged to support community
development initiatives related to the road sector in the NWfP.
1
Endnotes
1 United Nations Development Programme. 2007. Human
Development Report 2007/2008: Fighting Climate
Change: Human Solidarity in a Divided World. New york,
UsA: United Nations Development Programme (UNDP).
2 this section on “History of civil society Development” is
based primarily on iqbal, Muhammad Asif, Hina Khan,
and surkhab Javed. 2004. Nonprofit sector in Pakistan:
Historical background. SPDC Working Paper No. 4. Karachi,
Pakistan: social Policy and Development centre (sPDc).
3 baig, Adnan sattar rabia. 2001. civil society in Pakistan:
A Preliminary report on the civicUs index on civil
society Project in Pakistan. CIVICUS Index on Civil Society
Occasional Paper Series, volume 1, issue 11. August.
Karachi, Pakistan: Aga Khan foundation.
4 the estimate of 45,000 nonprofit organizations is
reported in Ghaus-Pasha, Aisha, Haroon Jamal, and
Muhammad Asif iqbal. 2002. Dimensions of the
Nonprofit Sector in Pakistan (Preliminary Estimates).
Karachi, Pakistan: social Policy and Development centre.
the figure comprises private, self-governing, voluntary
organizations that do not distribute profits. it includes
organizations registered under various laws as well
as unregistered agencies. However, religious worship
organizations, labor unions, and professional associations
are excluded from the total.
5 bhatti, Zubair. 2003. Pakistan Country Paper. Presented
at the Asia Pacific Philanthropy consortium (APPc)
conference, Makati city, Philippines, 5–7 september.
6 Ghaus-Pasha, Aisha, Haroon Jamal, and Muhammad
Asif iqbal. 2002. Dimensions of the Nonprofit Sector in
Pakistan (Preliminary Estimates). Karachi, Pakistan: social
Policy and Development centre.
7 see footnote 3.
8 Ghaus-Pasha, Aisha, and Muhammad Asif iqbal. 2003.
Defining the Nonprofit sector: Pakistan. Working Papers
of the Johns Hopkins Comparative Nonprofit Sector
Project, No. 42: baltimore: the Johns Hopkins center for
civil society studies.
9 Ghaus-Pasha, Aisha, Hafiz A. Pasha, and Muhammad Asif
iqbal. 2002. Nonprofit sector in Pakistan: Government
Policy and future issues. SPDC Working Paper No. 2.
Karachi, Pakistan: social Policy and Development centre.
10 Drawn from bhatti, footnote 5.Drawn from bhatti, footnote 5.
11 civicUs. Pakistan NGo forum. code of conduct for NGoscivicUs. Pakistan NGo forum. code of conduct for NGos
and cbos. Available: www.civicus.org/new/media/PNf%2Available: www.civicus.org/new/media/PNf%2
0code%20of%20conduct%20Pakistan.doc
12 see footnote 3.footnote 3.
13 Ghaus-Pasha, footnote 9.Ghaus-Pasha, footnote 9.
14 Pakistan centre for Philanthropy. www.pcp.org.pk/index.www.pcp.org.pk/index.
html.
this profile provides an overview of NGos and civil society in Pakistan. it was prepared by ADb’s NGo and civil society center. New information or comments on this
profile can be sent to ngocoordinator@adb.org. the views expressed in this profile are not necessarily the views of ADb or its members.
in this publication, $ refers to Us dollars. Publication stock No. ArM090528 May 2009